الیدو القنابل یة في الذب عن طریق الصوفیة “I N D EFENSE OF THE S PIRITUAL P ATH OF THE S UFIS ” i Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse Muhammad al - Mishri المشري بتألیف محمد by MUHAMMAD AL-MISHRI رحمھ أجمعین بھ ﷲ ونفعنا ﷲ الیدو القنابل یة في الذب عن طریق الصوفیة “I N D EFENSE OF THE S PIRITUAL P ATH OF THE S UFIS ” i Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse Muhammad al - Mishri المشري بتألیف محمد by MUHAMMAD AL-MISHRI رحمھ أجمعین بھ ﷲ ونفعنا ﷲ Translated from the Arabic by Sa’eed Simone Nardella &amp; Adnan Wood-Smith لطف ﷲ بھما Please direct any corrections or comments to Adnan without delay Revised: July 2018 A treatise written in Fusha Arabic. It begins with a series of questions, posed to al-Mishri (r.a.a.) by an unknown murid, though al-Mishri (r.a.a.) may have posed the questions to himself, which was a habit of his in his writing. Al-Hamdu Lillah, Lord of the Worlds, and may salah and salam be upon the noblest of all earlier and later peoples. May the highest degree of peace suitable for this station be unto the esteemed Sayyid Muhammad alMishri. I am letting you know that I was doing mudhakarah with some of the greats and I found a certain amount of difficulty in some matters, so I resolved to meet with you so that I could do mudhakarah in them with you. Then I feared that I would not find the time to do so, and wanted to delineate the matters so they could remain with you until you find some free time for them, and so any benefit to be gained from them could be spread. I request that your noble self give them importance, for I am in need of their elucidation, so perhaps I shall ask about some of them (as I am well aware of what you have!). Here are the questions: What is the reason behind denying matters about the awliya’ of Allah (t.w.t.)? Is the only one to deny them a deprived person? Does denial harm them? What about them is denied? Does denial come from vast knowledge or blatant ignorance? Regarding people who go through hals, have you denied any of their hals? Why did you join Shaykh Ibrahim? What do you say about the statement, “A shaykh’s descendant is like the shaykh”? What regarding Shaykh Ibrahim is denied? What do you have to say about his words, “What sincere youth do I have who will prostrate to my مظھر ”? What do you say regarding whether someone who attributes him- or herself to الحمد ﷲ رب العالمین والصلاة والسلام على أشرف الأولین والآخرین. فإلى جناب السید محمد المشري أرفع ما یناسب المقام من السلام وأُ حیطُكم علما بأني كنت أتذاكر مع بعض الأكابر في أشیاء فاستشكلت منها البعض فهممْت بالاتقاء بكم لأتذاكر معكم فیها فخفت أن لا أصادف وقت ف ارغ فأحببت أن أقیّدها لتبقى عندكم إلى وقت تجدون لها فیه ف ارغا ولیعم الانتفاع بها وألتمس من سیادتكم أن تهتموا بها فإني أحتاج لتبیینها وربما أسأل عن البعض منها ولا یخفى علي ما أنتم فیه وهذا نص الأسئلة: ما السبب في الإنكار على أولیاء اﷲ تبارك وتعالىِ؟ هل یُنكر علیهم إلا محروم؟ هل یضرهم الإنكار؟ 4 . ماذا یُنكَر علیهم؟ هل الإنكار من سعة العلم أو من فادح الجهل؟ هل أنكرتَ على أهل الأحوال شیئا من أحوالهم؟ ما سبب انخ ارطك في سلك الشیخ؟ ما تقول في قولهم ابن الشیخ كالشیخ؟ ماذا یُنكَر على الشیخ إب ارهیم؟ Shaykh Tijani and accepts him, while considering Shaykh Ibrahim to be a misguided liar, can be considered Tijani? What is the difference between Shaykh Tijani’s sealhood and his concealedness? What is the difference between the Name, the Attribute, and the Khalifah? What is the difference between the Khalifah and the Qutb? Are the haqa’iq always four—never having been more or less, nor will they ever be—or does that change according to states and means? What is the meaning of Shaykh Tijani’s words, “A man from the group who is not known in the Dunya, nor in the Akhirah”? Do arifs have a unique understanding of Allah’s (t.) speech? What is the meaning of Allah’s (t.) speech, “O Prophet, have taqwa of Allah”? For the people of haqiqah, what is subtly indicated by His speech, “by Asr”? What is the wisdom behind the extraction of mineral wealth and the many peculiar kinds of engineering? I kindly request a satisfactory reply, with as-Salaamu alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh returning to you. The one who wrote this is someone whose handwriting you will recognize. Introduction to the Responses Al-Hamdu Lillah, and may salah and salam be upon Allah’s Messenger. My dear Sayyid Muhammad Abdullah, I have looked at the questions and they require a proper written answer. I cannot deal with them in full because of the many lordly secrets and effusions to which these questions are related, and because of the widespread corruption of people’s states and their negative opinion about the people of Allah. We are in a time in which few are congenial toward the people of Allah; rather, you find those who look into the private faults of others and seize every opportunity ما عندكم في قوله "من لي بفتیان صدق یسجدون لمَ ظهَري"؟ ما تقول في تجانیة من ینتسب للشیخ التجاني ویصدّقه ویكذّب الشیخ ویضلله؟ ما الفرق بین ختمیة الشیخ التجاني وكتمیته؟ ما الفرق بین الاسم والصفة والخلیفة؟ ما الفرق بین الخلیفة والقطب؟ هل الحقائق أربع لا تزید ولا تنقص أزلا وأبدا أم هي بحسب الأحوال والوسائط؟ 16 . ما معنى قول الشیخ التجاني، "رجل من الطائفة لا یُعرف في الدنیا ولا في الآخرة"؟ هل للعارفین فهمٌ خاص في كلامِ اﷲ تعاِلى؟ ما معنى قوله تعالى ﴿ یَا أَُّ ی هَا ٱ َّ لنب يٓ ءُ ٱ تَّ ق ٱﷲَ ﴾؟ ما الإشارِة عند أهل الحقیقة في قوله تعالى: ﴿ وَٱلْعَصْر ﴾؟ ما الحكمة في استخ ارج الكنوز وكثرة غریب أنواع الهندسة؟ أطلب جوابا شافیا والسلام عائد علیكم ورحمة اﷲ وبركاته. وكَتب من لا یخفى علیكم خطُّ ه. توطئة الأجوبة الحمد ﷲ والصلاة والسلام على رسول اﷲ. أیها السید محمد عبد اﷲ أني طالعت الأسئلة فإذا هي تحتاج إلى تألیف ولا یمكن لي من أي وجه أن آتي بجمیع ما احتوت علیه لكثرة ما انطوت علیه to distort the meaning of their words. Whenever they hear something that could potentially carry dif- من الأس ارر الربانیة والفیوضات الإلهیة مع ما ترى ferent meanings and interpretations, they fly toward من فساد الأحوال وسوء الظن بأهل اﷲ فإننا في زمن the from the pure chosen people of Allah. This is what interpretation that would not fittingly come قَ َّ ل أن تجد فیه مسالما لأهل اﷲ بل تجد من یتتبع they do, even if that interpretation is far-fetched, and they distort the meaning of words to fit that inter- العوارت وینتهز الفرص في أوجه معاني كلامهم فكلما pretation, taking recourse to the intellectual and tex- سمع كلاما یتضمن أوجها من المعاني یطیر إلى contain to prove that the only possible interpreta-tual sciences and whatever logic and philosophy they المعنى الذي لا یلیق بأصفیاء اﷲ أن یبرز منهم ما tion of the wali’s words that is even slightly linguis- في دائرته وٕإن كان بمیدان الاحتمال فیوجه الكلام إلیه they have mentioned. They do this in order to make tically, grammatically, or logically plausible is the one ویشتغل بعقلیاته ونقلیاته وما احتوت علیه من منطق why I do not like to say—let alone write—anything, the wali appear outside the circle of Islam. This is وفلسفة لیبین أن كلام الولي لیس عنده وجه ولو كان for fear that it be heard or seen by one not fit for it, ضعیفا یقبله العقل أو النحو أو اللغة سوى الوجه الذي given your request, I am going to clarify what I can who will then be destroyed as a result. However, ذكره هو لیسد بذلك الباب دون دخول الولي في دائرة questions, as much as the circumstances allow. I ask and hint at some matters regarding some of the الإسلام. ولهذا لا أحب أن أقول فكیف بأن أكتب شیئا Allah to give me, you, and all believers success and خوفا من أن یسمعه أو ی اره أجنبي فیهلك به إلا أنني guidance. Indeed He is the one in charge of that and the one able to grant it. بعد أن كلّفتني فسأتكلف بتبیین ما یمكن وسأشیر إشا ارت حول بعضها بحسبما سمح به الحال وأسأل Question 1: What is the reason behind denial? اﷲ التوفیق والهدایة لي ولكم وللمؤمنین إنه ولي ذلك Answer : I say—and by Allah I charge victoriously— . والقادر علیه that there are many reasons, but they all go back to one: distance from Allah (t.w.t.). This is the root of all tribulations. Just as closeness to Allah is the root السؤال الأول: ما هو السبب في الإنكار؟ evil. Know that closeness is of two kinds, as is dis-of all good, so distance from Him is the root of all الجواب : فأقول وباﷲ أصول أنه له أسباب وترجع tance. By that I mean Allah’s closeness to you and your closeness to Him, and distance from Allah إلى سبب واحد هو البعد عن اﷲ تبارك وتعالى، فهو and—well, we do not really say “Allah’s distance” أصل كل بلاء فكما أن القرب من اﷲ هو أصل كل except in the sense of His dealing with us through the known consequences of distance, in the same خیر فكذلك البعد منه هو أصل كل شر. واعلم أن cepmanner as you say “Allah’s plot” and “Allah’s de-tion” with regard to His wrath. Far be it from القرب قربان والبعد كذلك، أي قرب اﷲ منك وقربك Allah to have such traits, but since He describes منه والبعد عن اﷲ ولا نقول بعد اﷲ إلا إذا قلناه is meant is His dealing with us himself thus in His own speech, we know that what according to what بمعنى معاملته بمقتضى البعد كما تقول كید اﷲ ومكر normally results from plots and deception; it is the اﷲ في غضبه، فاﷲ حاشاه من هذه الصفات وحیث same case with His distance. Allah’s being closer than the jugular vein or coming between a person and their heart is a reality that does not change under any circumstances, meaning that it is something pertaining to Allah’s Essence. Therefore, from this point of view, Allah’s closeness to His creation does not change, whether we are speaking of the closest creature to Him or the most distant, as indicated by the hadith “Do not consider me better than my brother Yunus bin Matta.” The Prophet is the one who traversed the seven heavens, the Throne, and the uppermost limit, until he was at two bows’ length or closer; yet Allah is not closer—i.e., in His Essence, which is not to be found in any particular direction—to him in that state than to Yunus, who found himself in three types of compounding darkness. As for the special type of closeness that carries the meaning of assistance, that is His closeness to the people of Ihsan. Therefore, understand the difference between closeness from the point of view of divine will and closeness from the point of view of wisdom, and between closeness with regard to Allah’s Essence and closeness with regard to His Attributes. Now let us return to the reasons behind denial, which all ultimately come from distance from Allah. The first of them is envy, which is the terminal illness that prevented the Jews from following the Master of Existence (s.a.w.s.). Other causes for denial are arrogance, being pleased with oneself, ignorance of the nafs’ shameful traits—because if people look at their own faults, they turn away from looking at the defects of others—and ignorance of the hals that the people of Allah go through. Add to this the fact that whenever people are involved in denial, it increases them in distance, which in turn increases them in denial, and the fact that the wali’s first step in wilayah is to kill their nafs and then fight other nufus. This means that whenever they find an opportunity to kill someone’s nafs, they will kill it with Allah, as in Allah erases whatever He wills from the nafs’ sense of self and establishes whatever He wills of His own sense of self. It is no secret that the people of nufus are regimented soldiers who know their enemies and are constantly striving against anyone أنها جاءت في كلامه علمنا أن معناها المعاملة بالمقتضى وكذلك البعد، فكون اﷲ أقرب من حبل الورید ویحول بین المرء وقلبه هذا أمر حقیقي لا یتغیر بحال من الأحوال ومعنى ذلك أنه ذاتي، فقرب اﷲ من خلقه من هذا الوجه لا فرق فیه بین أقرب خلق اﷲ من اﷲ وأبعد خلق اﷲ من اﷲ، وأما القرب الذي بمعنى النصر فهو قربه من المحسنین، فافهم الفرق بین القرب في باب المشیئة والقرب في باب الحكمة، والقرب من حیث الذات والقرب من حیث الصفات. ولنرجع إلى أسباب الإنكار الناشئة عن البعد عن اﷲ: فأولها الحسد وهو الداء العضال الذي صد الیهود عن اتباع سید الوجود صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم ومنها الكبر ومنها العجب ومنها عدم معرفة عیوب النفس، فلو نظر الإنسان إلى عیوبه لحار فیها عن النظر إلى عیوب غیره كما یشیر إلیه الحدیث "لا تفضّلوني على أخي یونس بن متى"—النبي الذي تجاوز السماوات السبع والعرش والرفرف إلى أن كان قاب قوسین أو أدنى لیس اﷲ بأقرب منه في هذه الحال من یونس الذي وقع في ظلمات ثلاث والمعنى أن اﷲ بالذات لیس فیه جهة عن جهة. ومنها الجهل بأحوال أهل اﷲ ومنها أنهم كلما أنكروا ازدادوا بعدا فیزداد الإنكار دائما كلما ازداد البعد ومنها أن الولي أول قدم عنده في الولایة هو قتل النفس ثم یجاهد الأنفس فكلما وجد فرصة لقتل نفس قتلها باﷲ أي یمحو اﷲ ما یشاء من أنانیة النفس ویثبت ما یشاء من أنانیته ولا یخفى أن أهل الأنفس جنود مجندة who is not wages war against their nuon their side, waging war against whoever fus and fighting against ویعلمون أعداءهم ویجاهدون دون أنفسهم دائما whoever fights them. They are thus enemies of the یحاربون من یحاربها ویقاتلون من یقاتلها فهم أعداء Truth, while the wali is the enemy of falsehood. The origin of this dispute is to be found in the . الحق والولي عدو الباطل two companions who reside in evdispute between the nafs and the ruh, for these are ery human at all وأصل هذا الخلاف من الخلاف الذي بین النفس times; until either the nafs dies or the ruh dies, they والروح فهما قرینان في كل إنسان دائما وقبل أن of their contesting with each other. The nafs fights will remain companions and no human will be free تموت النفس أو تموت الروح فهما قرینان فلا یخلو the ruh in order to kill it and then, once the ruh is إنسان من مصارعتهما. فالنفس تقاتل الروح لتقتلها drinking, worldly pleasures, amassing wealth, and dead, drag it to what it sees as beneficial—eating, وتجرها إذا ماتت إلى مصالحها في أكل وشرب ولذة amassing pride—so that the nafs can hold onto all of its vile traits without someone to disturb it and وتكاثر وتفاخر وتبقى متّصفة بجمیع أوصافها الخبیثة complicate things. As long as there is some life in دون ِّ مشوش وما دامت في الروح حیاة ولو قلت لا pletely free from the disturbance of the ruh. When the ruh—even if slight—the nafs will never be com- تسلم النفس من تشویشها ولو قلّ وحیث حصلت the ruh does die and the nafs is able to get what it wants from it, blowing its own breath of nafs-life النفس على م اردها من الروح بعد أن تموت الروح into it, the ruh becomes the property of the nafs, وتنفخ النفس فیها حیاتها النفسانیة تكون الروح تحت becomes twice as strong, since it now is not only free which does whatever it wants the ruh. Thus, the nafs ملك النفس وتتصرف فیها كیف شاءت فتقوى النفسُ for it. And even if the nafs is not quite stronger than to do what it wants, but also has a servant working بالضِعف لكونها صارت حرة وعندها مملوك یعمل its servant, at least it is not ruled by it. Thus a human معها وٕإن لم یكن أقوى منها فلیس دونها ولهذا المعنى predatory beasts—because of the servant that works becomes the worst of creatures—even worse than یصیر الإنسان شر البریة حتى السباع بسبب المملوك with their nafs towards their egotistical aims, thereby deserving two portions of evil: one for that nafs, and الذي یعمل مع نفسه لمصالحه النفسانیة فیستحق another for the nafs’ servant. . سهمین من الشر واحد لنفسه والآخر لمملوكها nafs to own it; if it manages to kill the nafs, breathe The ruh, on the other hand, likewise fights the والروح تقاتل النفس لتملكها مثل الذي سبق فإن its own ruh-life into it, take ownership of it, and as-cend with it to the spiritual realm, then the ruh be- قتلتها ونفخت فیها حیاتها الروحانیة وملكتها وطارت comes free and gains a humbled, obedient servant بها إلى عالم الأمر فتصیر الروح حرة ولها مملوك saying, “Put forward an imam to whom you were his who follows its orders. This is the meaning of the ذلیل منقاد لطاعتها وأوامرها وهذا هو معنى قولهم nafs used to be the imam. Just like the nafs, in this imam…” —the ruh is the final imam, whereas the و ِّ قد مْ إماماً كنتَ أنت إمامَه...(البیت)" فهذا الإمام " الأخیر هي الروح والأول النفس. فبهذا أیضا تقوى way the ruh becomes twice as strong as it was before, and deserves two portions of good. Thus a human becomes the best of creatures, even better than angels—which do count as a type of creature—because Allah placed in the human a tool for good (i.e. the ruh) and a tool for evil (i.e. the nafs), yet if they are able to subjugate this tool for evil, it becomes a tool for good, having reached the stage of the “pleased and pleasing” nafs. As for the angels, Allah gave them only the ruh, which cannot be used for anything but good as long as it is stands alone and apart from a nafs. The nafs and the ruh only come into agreement in the heart of the perfect wali, to whom they become submissive; the Iman of the nafs and the ruh will never be complete until the two of them have the wali decide between them whenever they dispute, as indicated by the ayah, “Nay, by your Lord, they do not fully believe until they have you decide between them in whatever disputes arise between them” (Qur’an 4:65). Know that for the ruh to be alive and the nafs to be dead—that is the real life after which there is no death, whether the one who has it is currently with us or has passed; whereas, for the nafs to be alive and the ruh to be dead—that is the death after which there is no life, similarly regardless of whether the one who has it is physically dead or alive. In this way, some of the dead are living and some of the living are dead, and few are those who understand the difference between death and life, since it is a subtle difference. The Shaykh indicated this in saying, “Does life inhere in death, or death in life? Who knows?” These two opposing sides of the nafs and the ruh are in constant battle, as long as there exists truth and falsehood. The origin of their dispute is to be found in the different factors that enter into them, both explicitly and implicitly. These factors are none other than the divine tajalliyat, so in fact the origin of the dispute between these two—indeed, the origin of every dispute—is a difference in madhhars. This is the case whether the dispute is between two separate things, or between two nisbahs of the same thing: a dispute between two separate things must involve a dispute between two nisbahs of the same thing, just as a dispute between two الروحُ بالضِ عف أي بمثلَ يْ ما كانت علیه وتستحق سهمین من الخیر فیصیر الإنسان بهذا خیر الب ریة حتى الملائكة—لأنهم من البریة—لأن الإنسان جعل اﷲ فیه آلة شر وهي النفس فإن سخرها له تكون آلة خیر حیث تكون ارضیة مرضیة، وجعل فیه آلة خیر وهي الروح، والملائكة أعطاهم اﷲ هذه الأخیرة وحدها ولا تصلح إلا للخیر ما دامت مجردة عن النفس، والنفس والروح لا تتّفقان إلا في قلب ولي كامل تكونان خاضعتین له فلا یتم إیمانهما حتى یحكّمانه فيِ ما شجر بینهما كماِ تشیر إلیه الآیة ﴿فَلَا وََرِّ بكَ لَا یُؤْمنُونَ حَتَّ ىٰ یُحَِّ كمُوكَ فیمَا شَجَرَ بَیْنَهُ مْ ﴾ واعلم أن حیاة الروح وموت النفس هي الحیاة الحقیقیة التي لا موت بعدها سواء كان صاحبها موجودا أو مفقودا، وحیاة النفس وموت الروح هي الموت الذي لا حیاة بعده أیضا سواء كان صاحبه حیا أو میتا ولهذا كان بعض الأموات أحیاء وبعض الأحیاء أمواتا وقلّ من یعلم الفرق بین الموت والحیاة لأنه خفيّ ولذلك أشار الشیخ بقوله "هل الموت في الحیاة أو الحیاة في الموت...خم" كما قال. وهذان الطرفان اللذان هما النفس والروح في مصارعة دائمة ما دام الحق والباطل، وأصل الخلاف هو اختلاف العوامل الداخلة علیهما لفظا وتقدی ار والعوامل هي التجلیات الإلهیة فاختلاف المظاهر حقیقةً هو أصل الخلاف بینهما بل هو أصل كل خلاف سواء كان بین اثنین أو بین نسبتین إذ لا یخلو خلاف بین اثنین من خلاف بین نسبتین كما لا یخلو خلاف بین نسبتین من خلاف بین مظهرین كالخلاف nisbahs must involve a dispute madhhars. An example of this is the dispute between between two بین نسبة الروح ونسبة الشبح فواحدة نسبة ظه ور the nisbah of the ruh and the nisbah of the physical . والثانیة نسبة بطون وكلاهما لا تقبل إلا حضرتها nisbah of hiddenness, and neither of them can ac-form: one is a nisbah of manifestness, the other is a فلذا تعلم أن الأمر بین الولي وعدوه أشد من ما cept anything but its own hadrah. From this you can know that the affair between بین المسلم والكافر لأن المسلم هدفه الإسلام فقط فلا the wali and their enemy is more serious than that یدعو إلا له والكافر لا یرید إلا مصلحة نفسه من lim’s only goal they call to is Islam, while the disbe- between a Muslim and a disbeliever, since the Mus- صیت وملك، والولي یدعو للإسلام والإیمان والإحسان liever only wants benefit for their own nafs (in terms ومن ثم یدعو للإیمان الحقیقي، وأدنى م ارتبه الفناء of having a good reputation and wealth); the wali, on the other hand, calls to Islam, Iman, and Ihsan— عن النفس والبقاء باﷲ في حض ارت أسمائه وصفاته therefore calling to true Iman, the lowest degree of which is fana’ of the nafs and baqa’ in Allah in the ومعلوم أن الأنفس أقرب لها الانقیاد للأول من الانقیاد hadrahs of His Names and His Attributes. It is well للثاني وكما أن معارضة الولي وصولته أقوى لقوة erage Muslim than follow a wali; similarly, just as the known that it is easier for the nafs to follow an av- إیمانه فكذلك صولة المنكر أقوى من صولة غیره wali fights more aggressively because of the strength of their Iman, so the denier fights more aggressively لإسلامه لأنه معارض من خبیثتین ظاه ار انتصا ار because of their Islam, since the denier’s opposition للدین ومدافعة عنه وحمیة له وباطنا حرصا منه على want to stand up for the deen, defend it, and display comes from two vile reasons: on the surface, they خصوصیته ومكانته ومصالحه البدنیة ودین آبائه إلى their own uniqueness, status, physical comforts, the zeal for it, while inwardly they are covetous over ! غیر ذلك مما تسول النفس كفانا اﷲ شرها view of the deen they have always grown up with, and other matters that the nafs has made enticing. May Allah suffice us from the nafs’ evil! السؤال الثاني: هل یُ ِنكر علیهم إلا محروم؟ الجواب : طبعا لا ینكر علیهم إلا محروم بكل ما في Question 2: Is the only one to deny them a de- معنى الكلمة لا بمعنى أنه محروم من دائرة ما خصهم اﷲ به من القرب والإخلاص والفیض والأس ارر prived person? Answer prived, in all manners of the word: not just deprived : Naturally, the only one to deny them is de- والأنوار فحسب بل هو محروم من دائرة الفضل from picking up on whatever closeness, sincerity, . مطلقا vored His wali with, but also deprived from picking emanation, secrets, and illuminations Allah has fa- واعلم أن الإنكار على م ارتب أدناها عدم up on Allah’s grace at all. You should know that there are levels of denial. التصدیق بالولي مع الكف عن الوقوف في وجه The lowest level simply involves not believing in a دعوته والاعت ارض علیه وأشدها المعاداة، فبهذا الأ ول of their call. The highest level involves outright en- wali, without opposing them or standing in the way الذي لا ذنب له إلا أنه ما صدق بالولي وما تبعه هو mity. One who denies on the first level—who incurs الذي یقال في حاله أنه محروم مما أعطى اﷲ لهذا no sin except in that they did not believe in or follow the wali—is said to be deprived from what Allah gave that wali. The is the one whose state would be termed absolute one who denies on the latter level الولي والثاني هو الم ارد بالحرمان المطلق لأنه عدو deprivation, because they are the absolute enemy of " اﷲ قطعا بدلیل "من عادى لي ولیا فقد آذنته بالحرب war on whoever shows enmitAllah, as shown by the hadith qudsi, “I have declared y to a wali of Mine” واﷲ لا یحارب إلا أعداءه، وتفهم معاداة اﷲ له من wages war. You can also understand Allah’s enmity (Bukhari), and it is only on His enemies that Allah قوله تعالى ﴿مَن كَانَ عَدُوا لِّ لٰهِ وَمَلَآ ئِكَتِهِ ...الآیة﴾ فلزم towards that person from His speech “Whoever is من كونه تعالى عدوا لعدو الملائكة أن یكون عدوا Jibril, and Mikail—then Allah is indeed an enemy to an enemy to Allah, His angels, His messengers, لمن كان عدوا لصالح المؤمنین لأن اﷲ قدمه علیهم such disbelievers” (Qur’an 2:98): since Allah is an في الِذكر فيِ قوله تعالىِ ﴿فإَِّ ن اﷲَِ هُوَ مَ وَْلا هُ وَجِبْرِیلُ enemy to the angels’ enemy, He must necessarily be an enemy to whoever is the righteous believer’s en- وَ صَال حُ الْمُؤْمن ینَ وَالْمَلَآ ئكَ ةُ بَعْدَ ذَ ل كَ ظ هیرٌ ﴾ وقد احتج the angels in His (t.) speech, “For truly Allah is his emy, because Allah mentioned that person before شیخنا التجاني بهذه الآیة على أن صالح المؤمنین Protector, and Jibril, the righteous believers, and the أفضل من الملائكة فمعاداته لعدو المفضول تلزم منها Shaykh Tijani used this ayah as proof that the right-angels are reinforcements after that” (Qur’an 66:4). معاداته لعدو الفاضل من باب الأولیة. أولئك هم خیر eous believer is better than the angels, so logically Allah’s enmity towards the enemy of someone of a . البریة ولا تسأل عن أعداء اﷲ كفانا اﷲ شرهم lesser status necessitates His enmity towards the en- best of creatures; as for the enemies of Allah, do not emy of someone of a greater status. Those are the السؤال الثالث: هل یضرهم الإنكار؟ الجواب : لا یضرهم بل ینفعهم كما قال الشیخ، "فمن ask about them…May Allah suffice us from their evil. ارم ضري فقد سعى في مصالحي" ومعنى ذلك أن اﷲ Question 3: Does denial harm them? هو الذي سلط الخلق على الولي لأمور كلها ترجع Answer : It does not harm them; on the contrary, it إلى مصالح الولي، منها أن الولي إذا أقبل اﷲ علیه benefits them, just as the Shaykh said, “The one who بمحض فضله ورضاه وأقبل علیه الخلق بالشر this means is that Allah is the one who gave the cre- aims to harm me has striven to my advantage.” What والإنكار لا یجد بدّا عن التوجه إلى اﷲ تبارك وتعالى to the wali’s advantage. For one, when Allah ap-ation power over the wali, for reasons that all return بالكلیة والاتجاء إلیه في كل أمر دق أو جل لأنه لیس proaches the wali with His pure grace and pleasure عنده غیره وهذا هو معنى قولهم "جزى اﷲ عنا إخواننا and denial, the wali has no choice but to turn to Al- and the whole creation approaches them with evil خی ار ردونا بجفائهم إلى اﷲ" وقد أشار الشیخ إلى ذلك lah (t.w.t.) with their whole being and flee to Him in every matter great or small, because they have none : بقوله other than He. That is the meaning of the saying, أجرى الأذى منهم لئلا تركنا “May Allah reward our brothers and sisters on our behalf—by their harshness with us, they returned us إلیهم بل للإله فاركنا to Allah.” The Shaykh also indicated this by saying: He made harm flow from them lest you lean On them—rather, on God should you lean For another reason, the wali bears their harm, so Allah rewards them for their forbearance. For another, Allah replaces their bad deeds with the good deeds of the deniers. For another, denial of the wali increases their fame, as in the line of poetry: And if Allah wants to spread the news of a virtue That was buried, He gifts it the tongue of an envier For another, the denier is tortured every time they see an increase of Allah’s blessing on the wali, so Allah makes more miracles manifest at the wali’s hands in order to punish His enemies. Question 4: What about them is denied? Answer : Usually, the denier goes through stages: he or she denies this thing once, and that thing another time, like a wolf that tries to steal from every direction, sometimes quite openly, and when one approach is blocked it comes from another…his or her real goal is to show opposition to the people of Allah, which entails extinguishing Allah’s light. The wali’s only desire is to let Allah’s light shine through all of his or her words and actions, so if he or she says, “I’m this” and “I’m that,” describing him- or herself in all kinds of beautiful ways, his or her only intention in that case is to call to Allah. In such a situation, the denier will say that the wali is just making false claims and only wants to call to him- or herself. That is because the denier does not see the Manifest Truth over Whom there is no veil—if he or she were to see that, he or she would know that the wali is simply translating what the Truth has said; instead, the denier sees nothing but the nafs, calling to oneself, plotting, and treachery—thereby his or her own attributes appear to him or her in the wali, so he or she uses those vile traits to translate what is being said. On the other hand, after the wali has experienced fana’, extinction, closeness, flooding over, and tajalli, the attributes of Truth appear to him or her and he or she uses them to translate accordingly. Thus the wali translates only for Allah, while the denier translates only for his or her nafs. I once saw a metaphor for this when I was standing near a small, new-looking car. Suddenly, a ومنها أن یصبر على أذاهم فیعطیه اﷲ ثواب الصبر ومنها أن یبدل اﷲ له سیئاته بحسناتهم ومنها أن الإنكار على الولي یزیده ظهوار كما في البیت: وٕإذا أارد اﷲ نشر فضیلة طویت أتاح لها لسان حسود ومنها أن المنكر یتعذب بت ازید ما أنعم اﷲ على الولي فیزید اﷲ الولي في الك ارمات الظاهرة لیعذب أعداءه. السؤال الاربع: ماذا یُ نكَر علیهم؟ الجواب : غالب حال المنكر أن یكون متطوار ینكر هذا مرة وهذا مرة كالذئب یحاول من كل جهة ویختلس في جل أوقاته وربما أخذ جهرة وٕإذا سدت السبل من جهة یأتي من جهة أخرى وهدفه الحقیقي المعارضة لأهل اﷲ وتلك هي إطفاء نور اﷲ فالولي لا م ارد له إلا إظهار نور اﷲ في جمیع أقواله وأفعاله، فإذا قال أنا كذا وأنا كذا وذكر أنه متصف بجمیع الأوصاف المحمودة فلا نیة له في ذلك إلا الجمع على اﷲ وفي هذا الحال یقول المنكر أنه یدعي ولا یرید إلا الجمع على نفسه لأن المنكر لا یرى الحق الظاهر الذي لیس فوقه حجاب لیعلم أن المترجم عنه الحق وٕإنما یرى النفس والجمع علیها والمكر والخدیعة فتظهر له صفاته في الولي فیترجم عنه بها كما ظهرت للولي بعد الفناء والإمحاء والقرب والإفاضة والتجلي صفاتُ الحق فیترجم عنها، فالولي لا یترجم إلا عن اﷲ والمنكر لا یترجم إلا عن نفسه. وقد أریت مثالا ذات یوم وأنا واقف حول سیارة صغیرة والحال أنها جدیدة فإذا بدیك حولها وینظر rooster appeared next to it and saw his own reflection in the car, so he immediately started moving his feathers, screaming, and pecking at the car with his beak. Every time he made a movement and showed off more, he saw that his rival had done the same, so he screamed at him and struck him with his beak more violently than before, until he almost died, thinking—nay, knowing for sure—that he was fighting another rooster, whereas in reality he was only fighting himself. Similarly, the denier only sees his or her own attributes and only fights him- or herself, and if the wali speaks from the maqam of selfless slavehood and uses attributes of deficiency to describe him- or herself, the denier has no choice but to say, “He just said what he did to show everyone how pious he is, because everyone knows that pious people use attributes of deficiency when they talk about themselves.” And if he or she sees someone making dhikr who then becomes engrossed in what he or she is making dhikr of and thus distracted from the act of dhikr itself, the denier says, “She left out a letter and I didn’t hear her say it,” as if the one making dhikr was only doing it so the denier would hear it. That is how the denier gives his or her own nafs the right to judge the one making dhikr, and to judge Allah— where on earth did the denier get the idea that the person making dhikr is only doing it for the denier to hear it, and that the one of whom he or she is making dhikr (i.e. Allah) only hears what the denier hears? May Allah be exalted high above what they say. The denial can also start going into elements of creed and shari’ah, such that every time the denier sees something that is not the established opinion in his or her imam’s madhhab, he or she denies it, as if he or she had all-encompassing knowledge of the madhhab of his or her imam, the imam had all-encompassing knowledge of the shari’ah, and his or her own heart were the Preserved Tablet—nay, even above that: Umm al-Kitab (which is the hadrah that contains what is in the Preserved Tablet, and not vice versa)! نفسه فیها فإذا بالدیك یحرك ریشه ویصیح وینقر بمنقاره السیارة وكلما تحرك وازداد ما به یرى أن صاحبه وقع له مثل ذلك ویصیح علیه ویضربه بمنقاره أشد مما كان یفعل حتى كاد أن یموت ظنا منه بل تحققا أنه یقاتل دیكا آخر وهو لا یقاتل إلا نفسه. فكذلك المنكر لا یرى إلا صفاته ولا یقاتل إلا نفسه وٕإذا كان الولي في مقام العبودة وترجم عن نفسه بصفات النقص لا بد أن یقول المنكر هذا قاله لیظهر للناس صلاحه لأنه من شأن الصالحین أن یترجموا عن أنفسهم بالنقص وٕإذا أرى المنكر ذاك ار یذكر اﷲ غائبا عن الذكر في المذكور یقول حذف حرفا فما سمعته نطق به كأن الذاكر ما ذكر إلا لیسمعه هو فیحكم نفسه على حال الذاكر ویحكمها على اﷲ فمن أین للمنكر أن الذاكر ما ذكر إلا لیسمعه وأن المذكور الذي هو اﷲ لا یسمع إلا ما یسمع المنكر فتعالى اﷲ عما یقولون علوا كبی ار. وربما تطور الإنكار إلى العقائد والش ارئع فكلما أرى المنكر شیئا لا یعلم شهرته في مذهب إمامه ینكره كأنه محیط بمذهب إمامه وكأن إمامه محیط بالشریعة وكأن قلبه عنده هو اللوح المحفوظ بل أم الكتاب التي هي الحضرة التي تحوي ما في اللوح ولا یحوي اللوح ما فیها. السؤال الخامس: هل الإنكار من سعة العلم...إلخ؟ الجواب : الإنكار لا یكون إلا من الجهل فكل ولي فوق ولي یصدقه ولا عكس وقد قال ابن عربي الحاتمي: Question 5: Does denial come from vast knowledge or blatant ignorance? Answer : Denial only comes from ignorance. Every wali has a wali over him or her who is able to confirm what he or she has, but not the other way round. Ibn Arabi al-Hatimi said, “Humanity consists of common people, fiqh scholars, aspiring Sufis, Sufis, those who have received their spiritual opening, and arifs—each group denies the group that is above it, due to the veil between them.” The level of the arifs is where the path of this great qutb Ibn Arabi al-Hatimi ended—hence why he listed it last— yet it is where the path of Shaykh Tijani’s (r.a.a.) companions begins, and beyond it remain many levels… Question 6: Regarding people who go through hals, have you denied any of their hals? Answer : People fall into four categories in this regard: those who make empty claims that have basis neither in shari’ah nor in haqiqah majdhubs who base their sayings on haqiqah but must understand how to speak more wisely those who have entered the da’irah of ma’rifah the complete ones As for those in the first group, I am the most vehement denouncer of them, but my denunciation occurs only in the heart, since there is no point in doing anything else. As for those in the second group, I confirm them internally by haqiqah, but deny them by the tongue of shari’ah. I excuse them and pay attention to their future states: if I see that they are journeying step by step towards completion and surpassing those slips that result from their submergence in the ocean of divine unity, I rejoice at their hal and hope for their success. If, on the other hand, I see them staying in one place and not surpassing it, girded always by the speech of jadhb, moving towards their desires and covering themselves up with the darkness of jadhb, I know that they have mixed a good إن الناس عامة وفقهاء ومتصوفة وصوفیة ومفتوحعلیهم وعارفون وكل فرقة تنكر على الفرقة التي فوقها للحجاب الذي بینهم وفرقة العارفین التي جعلها هي النهایة هي بدایة أصحاب الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه هي التي انتهى إلیها هذا القطب الجلیل وبقي...وبقي... السؤال السادس: هل أنكرتَ على أهل الأحوال شیئا من أحوالهم؟ الجواب : الناس على أربعة أقسام في هذا المعنى، القسم الأول أهل الدعاوى التي لا أساس لها شریعة ولا حقیقة والثاني المجاذیب الذین یبنون على أساس الحقیقة ولا بد لهم في فهم خطاب الحكمة والثالث الذین دخلوا دائرة المعرفة وال اربع الكمل. أما القسم الأول فأنا من أشد الناس إنكا ار علیه إلا أني أجعله قلبیا لعدم جدوى ما سواه. والقسم الثاني أصدقه بقلب الحقیقة وأكذبه بلسان الشریعة وأعذره وأنظر في مستقبله فإن أریته سائ ار نحو الكمال ویتجاوز تلك العث ارت التي تحصل له بسبب انغماسه في بحر الوحدة شیئا فشیئا أفرح بحاله وأطمع له في النجاح وٕإن أریته في موقف واحد لا یتجاوزه ویتنطق بكلام الجذب دائما ویسیر نحو شهواته مستت ار بظلام الجذب أعلم أنه خلط عملا صالحا وآخر سیئا عسى اﷲ أن یتوب علیه، فهذا الجنس أصدقه من وجه وأكذبه من وجه حتى یتوب فمن تاب تاب اﷲ علیه. deed with a bad one, and perhaps Allah will relent unto them. I believe this group from one angle and deny them from another—until they repent, for whoever repents, Allah has relented unto them. Those in the third group, who have entered the circle of ma ’ rifah, are rarely to be criticized, except for their lack of familiarity with the fine points of the nafs’ plotting, since that is something from which one is rarely free. This is because the nafs is always present, and one cannot be blamed for one’s nafs being present, but rather for one’s lack of awareness of its presence and lack of knowledge of its cunning and plots. Such is the jihad against the nafs, without which perfection is impossible. For as long as the arif’s hands are tied when it comes to the conspiracies of the nafs and its plots—stealing with thieves and then joining the detectives to follow the clues of the crime—he or she will not attain the rank of perfection, that of the fourth group, who are the people of perfection. Those in the fourth group are in reality the people of perfection. Perfection belongs to Allah, so they belong to Him as well. Whoever sees a defect in them should know that that is from his or her own nafs, not from them; as for me, I just like to lower my gaze and I know—al-Hamdu Lillah—of the plots of my own nafs, which prevents me from looking into the plots of others. May Allah give us success to do that which He loves and is pleased with, and may He cure, by His grace, our diseased hearts. Question 7: Why did you join Shaykh Ibrahim? Answer : That is something that Allah decreed in His pre-eternity and for which I praise and thank Him, because these are all affairs that He manifests in this life, but does not initiate here. In terms of the material causes we can point to, one of the reasons is that when I was young I had a grandmother who excelled in the science of sirah, and she would always entertain me as a child with the stories of Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.s.), the rejection and plotting he encountered from his enemies, and how he was accused of using magic and being crazy. Love for him and a desire to support him therefore took root in my heart, والقسم الثالث الذي ذخل دائرة المعرفة قل أنتنتقد علیه إلا ما كان من عدم الاطلاع على دقائق دسائس النفس فإن ذلك قل أن یسلم منه أحد لأن النفس تدخل دائما ولا لوم في تدخلها وٕإنما اللوم على عدم الانتباه لها وعدم معرفة كیدها ودسائسها وهذا هو جهاد النفس الذي لا یصلح الكمال دونه وما دام العارف مكتوف الأیدي حول مؤام ارت النفس ودسائسها—تسرق مع الس ارق وتمشي على الأثر مع المفتشین—لا یصل إلى مرتبة الكمال والقسم ال اربع وهم أهل الكمال فإنهم هم أهل الكمال حقیقة والكمال ﷲ فهم ﷲ أیضا ومن أرى منهم نقصا فلیعلم أن ذلك من نفسه لا منهم إلا أني على كل حال لا أحب إلا أن أغض من بصري وأعلم وﷲ الحمد من دسائس نفسي ما یصدني عن دسائس غیري واﷲ یوفقنا لما یحب ویرضى ویداوي بمنّه قلوبها المرضى. السؤال السابع: ما سبب انخارطك في سلك الشیخ؟ الجواب : ذلك أمر قدره اﷲ في أزله أحمده وأشكره علیه إذ هي أمور یبدیها لا یبتدئها ومن الأسباب أني في صغري كانت عندي جدة فائقة في علوم السیرة وكانت دائما تعللني وأنا صبي بأخبار رسول اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم وما لاقى من التكذیب وكید الأعداء وما رمي به من السحر والجنون فغرست في قلبي محبته والانتصار له بل وحتى بقي في قلبي أن لا یرمى أحد بمثل ما رمي به إلا وأحببته وانتصرت له. من أجل ذلك أحببت الشیخ إب ارهیم ابتداء قبل أن أعرفه، ولما بلغت وتجدد تعلقي بمعرفة اﷲ تفكرت في until I carried in my heart the need to love and support everyone who met with the same adversities and accusations that he faced. It is for this reason that I loved Shaykh Ibrahim from the beginning, before even knowing him. When I reached puberty and my attachment to ma’rifah of Allah was renewed, I thought about what means I should take to Allah, and I was torn between him and Muhammad Lamin Ould Beddi. The Shaykh’s virtue, and the spiritual effusion that had flooded over his companions, was apparent to me. However, Sayyid Muhammad Lamin’s istiqamah, scrupulousness, and knowledge were also apparent to me, in addition to the fact that his father Abba had been my father’s means, and, of course, people naturally incline to what their forefathers have followed. Abba was the khalifah of his father Beddi, who took from Shaykh Muhammad al-Hafiz, who took from Shaykh Tijani—may Allah be pleased with all of them, may He please them, and may He be pleased with us through them, Amin! I did not doubt in this chain back to Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.), yet there was also no doubt that what Shaykh Ibrahim had was true, and that it was an unstoppable divine flood. However, in the beginning, my confidence that Sayyid Muhammad Lamin was a real Tijani was stronger than my confidence in that regarding others, despite the fact that my confidence in the benefit to be gained at Shaykh Ibrahim’s hands surpassed my confidence in anyone else in that regard. This is how the confusion that I mentioned earlier came about. But then, after pondering for several hours, I concluded that I should take the Tijani Tariqah from the place where I was sure it was to be genuinely found, and seek madad there; then, if I found madad there, that would be enough for me— otherwise, I would seek madad from where I knew it to be. Therefore, one night almost a year after reaching puberty, I went to Sayyid Muhammad Lamin and asked him for the Tijani Tariqah. He asked me with adab and good character, “What about Shaykh Ibrahim?” I said, “I have seen him, but I have come to you specifically.” So he promised to give it to me once I returned to him. When I returned, he gave me the Tijani وسیلة إلى اﷲ فٍتحیرت بینه وبین محمد الأمین بنبدي، فغیر خاف عليّ ما علیه الشیخ وما عم أصحابه من الفیض وما علیه السید محمد الأمین من الاستقامة والورع والعلم مع أن والده آب هو وسیلة والدي وطبعا جبل الإنسان على ما كان علیه آباءه، وآب خلیفة عن والده بدي وذلك عن الشیخ محمد الحافظ وذلك عن الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عن الجمیع وأرضاهم وعنا بهم آمین، وهذا السند عن الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه أنا لا أشك فیه بحال والذي عند الشیخ لا شك في كونه حقا وأنه فیض إلهي لا مرّدّ له إلا أني في تلك البدایة أشد ثقة بتجانیة السید محمد الأمین من غیره مع ثقتي بالانتفاع على ید الشیخ أكثر من غیره. لهذا وقعت تلك الحیرة التي ذكرت لكن بعد تفكر دام ساعات استثمرت أن آخذ التجانیة من المحل الذي أتحقق تجانیته وأطلب المدد فإن وجدته استفنیت به وٕإلا فأطلبه من محله الذي لا أشك في أنه فیه، فأتیت للسید محمد الأمین لیلا بعد بلوغي بما یقارب عاما وطلبت منه التجانیة فقال لي بأدب وحسن خلق ما بالك في الشیخ إب ارهیم، فقلت له أریته لكن أتیتكم أنتم فواعدني بإعطائها بعد الرجوع إلیه فلما رجعت إلیه أعطاها لي ومكثت ما یقارب عامین أق أر الأوارد وأتقرب الفتح وكنت ذات لیلة نائما حتى أریت في المنام أني مشتغل بهدم حائط حتى هدمت منه قدر ما أبصره منه فلما أبصرت أریت جانب الحائط الثانيَ الذي لست فیه عدد من الخلق لا یعلمه إلا اﷲ وٕإذا هم جمیعا مشتغلون في هدم الحائط وقد هدموا منه Tariqah, wirds and approaching spiritual opening. and I spent almost two years reciting the كثی ار فذهبت بسرعة إلیهم ودخلت من المحل الواسع One night when I was asleep, I dreamt that I الذي هدموا ولم أعرف في المنام من ذلك الخلق إلا enough of it to see through. When I looked through was busy demolishing a wall, until I had taken down محمد الحافظ بن محمد عالي فتعلقت أني جعلت یدي it, I saw on the other side a number of people—God knows how many—all busy demolishing the wall, علیه حال كوني متجاواز إلى من في وسط الحائط and they had already gotten much of it done. So I فوجدته رسول اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم فلما وصلت breach they had made in the wall. In my dream, I did rushed toward them and entered through the large إلیه ظهرت الشمس لي من المغرب فبهت الذي كفر not recognize any of them except Muhammad al- واستیقظت وذهبت إلى الشیخ وجدد لي وتربیت على with my hand as I reached those in the middle of the Hafiz bin Muhammad Aali, so I grabbed on to him . یده (wall, and I found him to be the Messenger of Allah s.a.w.s.). Once I reached him, the sun appeared to me from the west, and “the disbeliever was shocked into silence.” السؤال الثامن: هل ابن الشیخ كالشیخ؟ الجواب : أقول أن ابن الشیخ إن كان كالشیخ في العلم I woke up and went to Shaykh Ibrahim, who والمعرفة والكمال یكون كالشیخ وكذلك ابن المرید إن renewed the wird for me, and I received tarbiyah at his hands. اتصف بأوصاف الشیخ یكون كالشیخ. أما بمجرد البنوة وحدها فذلك لا یمكن بحال من الأحوال أن Question 8: Is a shaykh’s descendant like the یكون كالشیخ اللهم إذا كان في الاحت ارم فاحت ارم أبناء ? shaykh Answer : I say that if the descendant of a shaykh is الصالحین من احت ارم الصاِلحین وقد قال اﷲ تبارك tion, he or she is like the shaykh, and the same rings like the shaykh in knowledge, ma’rifah, and perfec- وتعالى ﴿وَكَانَ أَبُوهُمَا صَالحًا﴾ أو كان متصفا ببعض the same qualities as the shaykh, then he or she is true for the descendant of a murid: if he or she has صفاته دون بعض فإنه یصح لمن تغلبت علیه like the shaykh. As for simply being a descendant in الأحوال الإلهیة وكان ینظر الأمور بحسب خواتمها and of itself, that cannot at all mean that the de-scendant would necessarily be like the shaykh—un- أن ینظر الولد بحسب ما قدر اﷲ له في الآخرة less we are talking about them: in that case, properly honouring the righteous the respect we accord to ویلحقه بمرتبة أبیِِه نظٍ ار لقوله تعِالى ﴿وَال َّ ذِینَ آمَ نُوا entails honouring their descendants. Allah (t.w.t.) وَ اتَّ بَعَتهمْ ذُِّ رَّ یتهمْ بإیمَان أَلْحَقْنَا بهمْ ذُِّ رَّ یاته م﴾ ولا یخفى oured two orphans, “Their forefather was a right-has said in this regard, when explaining why He hon- أن مرتبة الولي التي صار بها شیخا مرتبة إلهیة eous man” (Qur’an 18:82). Another exception is if the descendant has some but not all of the same متعلقة بالروح لا بالشبح فإن كان الولد ولد روح فیكون . كالشیخ وٕإلا فلا qualities: in that case,vine hals and able to see matters based on their ends, for someone overcome by di- وقد جرى بیني حدیث مع أحد أبناء المشائخ ذات it is proper to look at that descendant according to یوم في هذا المعنى فذكر لي أن واحدا من أبناء and consequently consider him or her to enjoy the what Allah has decreed for him or her in the Akhirah المشائ خ أتى لأحد كانت بینه مع والده اربطة دینیة lah’s saying, “And for those who believe and have same station of his or her forefather, following Al- مشیخة أو شبهها، لما أتاه لم ینزله منزلة والده غضب progeny who follow them in belief, We will unite علیه وأظهر له الشر والقطیعة فقلت له "أبناء المشائخ known that the station by which a wali has become them with their progeny” (Qur’an 52:21). It is well الیوم كأنهم أبناء الملوك فقط والفرق بینهم مع أبناء a shaykh is a divine matter that has to do with the الملوك ینبغي أن یكون واضحا بینا فأبناء المشائخ ruh—not the physical form—so if the descendant is a descendant in ruh, then he or she will be like the طریقهم أن یسلكوا نهج آبائهم من عبودة وصدق shaykh; otherwise, such will not be the case. I was discussing this matter one day with the وٕإ خلاص وحسن خلق فإن أرت الناس هذه الأخلاق لا descendant of a shaykh, so he mentioned to me that بد أن تستنشق فیهم روائحها مع أن هذه الأوصاف had some connection in deen—i.e. a shaykh-murid another son of a shaykh came to someone who had من كانت فیه في الغالب أن یكون احتیاج الناس إلیه relationship, or something similar—with his father, but when the shaykh’s son came to him, he did not أشد من احتیاجه لها فمن تركهم لا یضرهم وٕإنما یضر treat the son as he would have treated his father, so نفسه . وأما أبناء الملوك فلا لوم علیهم إذا سلكوا the son got angry, cut off ties with him, and dis-played ill-will towards him. I said to him, “The de- مسلك العنف والقوة إلا أن القرن العشرین ترقى عن scendants of shaykhs these days all act as if they are royal descendants, but the difference between the تلك الطباع التي كانت في الملوك وأبنائهم فأحرى descendants of shaykhs and the descendants of أبناء المشائخ ولم یبق لهم الیوم إلا أن یرجعوا للعبودة shaykhs’ descendants is to follow the path of their kings should be plain and clear: the way set out for ولدیمق ارطیة القرن الذي نعیش فیه وهو قرن الحریة forefathers, in terms of selfless slavehood, honesty, sincerity, and good character. Then, if people see ”. والمساواة these good qualities in them, they would necessarily وأنا في نفسي في حیرة من كیفیة معاملة أبناء want to breathe in such sweet fragrances from them; and that is despite the fact that one who has such الأشیاخ الیوم فإنك تكاد أن لا ترى منهم عبدا ﷲ noble qualities is usually not as much in need of other people as they are in need of him or her, so صالحا ماشیا ملتجئا إلى اﷲ تبارك وتعالى ومتواضعا those who turn away from such a person would only له معتمدا علیه ومترجما بلسان حال أو مقال بل تجده be harming themselves. As for the descendants of kings, no one rebukes them if they act violently and منغمسا في آثار والده ومنطمسا فیها فت اره في جل the twentieth century aggressively—at least, that used to be the case, but has largely risen above what أوقاته یت رجم عن والده، فلا یذكر إلا هو وما كان used to be in the nature of kings and their descend- علیه في حیاته وكثرة من انتفع على یده، وهذا هو scendants of shaykhs to follow this trend. Today, the ants, and it is even more appropriate for the de- أحسن أحواله وأترك الباقي من سرد أحوالهم احت ارما only way left for them is to find their way back to لآبائهم . وكلما توجه متوجه إلى اﷲ ودعا إلیه تعصبوا selfless slavehood and the democracy of this century we find ourselves in, the century of freedom and equality.” As for me, I have no idea how to treat the descendants of shaykhs these days, since you so rarely see any of them walking around as pious slaves to Allah, finding refuge in Allah (t.w.t.), humbling themselves before Him, relying solely on Him, and expressing something by the tongue of their own hal or saying some original words—rather, you find them submerged in accounts of their forefathers, obliterated in them. You always see each one of them expressing something his or her forefather said, mentioning nothing but him, what his life was like, and how many people benefitted from him. And that is the best state you might find them in— out of respect for their forefathers, I shall refrain from mentioning any other state you might find them in…Then every time someone oriented to Allah turns to Allah and calls to Him, they get zealous against him or her and accuse him or her of disbelief, magic, or madness, out of blind zeal for the deen of their forefathers—or to put it better, out of blind zeal for their forefathers, regardless of their deen. If their blind zeal were for the deen of their forefathers, then there is ultimately only one deen, i.e. following the Book and Sunnah externally and achieving fana’ from the nafs and baqa’ in Allah internally, plus having ma’rifah of Allah’s Names and Attributes, adab with Allah, and good character with all of Allah’s creatures. That is the deen, and if their blind zeal were for that, they would not have gone against the awliya’ or tried to compete with them, but instead they flew up into the heavenly realm of blind zeal for their forefathers. This has blinded them from the deen, and I do not know how to treat them. If I mention good things about their pious predecessors, they become even more misguided and enticed, whereas if I do not make mention of their forefathers, I can find no peace with them. Were it not for our fear of the awliya’, the most beneficial way to treat their descendants today would be to deny that they have anything special—perhaps one would thereby clear their hearts of their forefathers and engender in them fear and humility before Allah, such that they would return to Him. As long as they remain in the علیه ورموه بالكفر والسحر والجنون تعصبا لدین الآباء، وبعبارة أخرى تعصبا للآباء بقطع النظر عن دینهم، فلو كان تعصبهم لدین آبائهم فالدین واحد وهو في الظاهر التمسك بالكتاب والسنة وفي الباطن الفناء عن النفس والبقاء باﷲ ومعرفة أسمائه وصفاته والأدب مع اﷲ وحسن الخلق مع كل مخلوق ﷲ. هذا هو الدین، ولو كان تعصبهم له لَ مَا خالفوا الأولیاء وما غایروهم لكن طاروا في ملكوت من التعصب للآباء. أعماهم عن الدین ولا أعلم بما أعاملهم—إن ذكرت لهم سلفهم الصالح بخیر أزیدهم غوایة وٕإن لم أذكر لهم لا أجد منهم سلامة، ولو لا الخوف من الأولیاء لكانت مصلحة أبنائهم الیوم في نفي الخصوصیة عنهم لعل أن یفرغ أحد بذلك قلوَبَهم من آبائهم لیُدخلها الخوف والخشیة من اﷲ حتى یرجعوا إلیه لأنهم ما داموا في الحال الأول لا یرجى لهم غیره لاستیلائه على قلوبهم ولا أعلم ماذا أفعل معهم هل أسلك معهم هذا المسلك الأخیر وٕإن كان فیه سوء أدب مع الولي فاﷲ یعلم أني ما أردت ذلك وٕإنما أردت مصلحة ولده والمعاملة مع اﷲ والخوف منه لا من غیره أو أقطع لهم بالانقطاع عن آبائهم وأتركهم وما هم فیه وأقول فیهم ﴿إَِّ نهُ لیْسَ مِنْ أََهْلكَ إَِّ نهُ عَ مَلٌ غَیْ رُ صَ ال حٍ ﴾ فلو كان مجرد البنوة وحدها لا تكفي فالابن الحقیقي ابن الدین سواء بعد في النسب أو قرب. ولا أعلم من أین للناس الیوم بأن خلیفة الولي لا یكون إلا من ولده ومن أین أخذوا هذا واستنبطوه فأي خلافة سارت على هذا المنوال المتداول الیوم فإذا نظرنا إلى أصل الخلافة فإن أولها الخلافة عن اﷲ first state, state has taken possession of their hearts. I do not there is no other hope for them, since that كخلافة آدم وداوود وما ادعى مدع لهم البنوة ﷲ كما know what to do with them: should I take this last ادعي لعیسى علیه السلام وعزیر وٕإن نظرنا الخلافة with a wali? Allah knows that I do not want that; I approach with them, even if it involves bad adab من حیث نبینا محمد صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم فإن خلیفته while having proper comportment with only want to do what is best for the descendant, Allah and بالإجماع أبو بكر الصدیق رضي اﷲ عنه وخلیفة أبي fear of Him alone. Or should I cut them off by cut- بكر عمر رضي اﷲ عنه ولیس أبو بكر ابنا لرسول and whatever they are currently involved in, and say ting myself off from their forefathers, leave them اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم وحتى أنه لیس من أقرب in regards to them what Allah said to Nuh regarding الصحابة إلیه وكذلك عمر من أبي بكر إلى باقي family—indeed, his actions were not righteous” his disobedient son: “Indeed, he is not from your الخلفاء رضي اﷲ عنهم، وٕإذا نظرنا الخلافة من حیث someone great does not suffice, that means that the (Qur’an 11:46)? If simply being the descendant of شیخنا التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه فخلیفته علي ح ارزم real descendant is the descendant in deen, regardless ومن خلفائه الشیخ محمد الحافظ ولیس فیهما ولد له of actual kinship. I do not know where people these days got this وٕإذا نظرنا إلى الشیخ محمد الحافظ فخلیفته بدي idea from, this idea people keep repeating thatkhalifah of a wali can only be a descendant—where the ولیس من أبنائه ویا لیت شعري من أین نزل هذا did they get this from, and how did they derive it? الوحي الذي ما جاء من عند اﷲ ولا من رسوله ولا من at the origin of khilafah, the first example of it would When has khilafah ever worked like this? If we look الشیخ التجاني ولا من خلفائه ولم یبق إلا أن نعرف be khilafah of Allah, as in the khilafah of Adam and Dawud —no one ever claimed that either one of . أنه إبلیس فقط لا غیر من عندیاته لعنة اﷲ علیه them was a son of Allah, as was claimed in regards to Isa (a.s.) and Uzair. Then if we look at the khilafah of our Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), his khalifah السؤال التاسع: ماذا یُنكَ ر على الشیخ إبارهیم؟ Abu Bakr’s khalifah was Umar (r.a.a.). Abu Bakr was was Abu Bakr al-Siddiq (r.a.a.) by consensus, and الِجواب : حیّ رَتَني بهذا السؤال، كل شيء ینكر علیه not a son of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)—of all ول مَ لم تقل ماذا یصدق فیه لأن الحصر في هذا الباب est to him in actual kinship—and similarly Umar to the Companions, he was not even among those clos- أقرب وكیف یحصر ذلك مع أن الشیخ أظهره اﷲ في Abu Bakr, and after them the relationship between each successive pair of khalifahs (r.a.a.). Then if we هذا الزمن الفاسد الذي تغلب فیه أهل الجهل والظلام look at the khilafah of Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.), his kha- ونبذوا الشریعة والحقیقة وارء ظهورهم، وما دعا أحد lifahs was Shaykh Muhammad al-Hafiz, and neither lifah was Ali Harazim, and another one of his kha- إلى اﷲ في أي زمن إلا قوبل بالإنكار فكیف إذا كان of them was Shaykh Tijani’s (r.a.a.) son. Then if we look at Shaykh Muhammad al-Hafiz, his khalifah الزمن هذا الزمن وكان الداعي أعظم داع إلى اﷲ بعد was Beddi, who was not one of his sons. If only I الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه والنبي صلى اﷲ علیه not come from Allah, nor His prophet, nor Shaykh knew where such revelation came from, since it did وسلم، سبحان اﷲ العظیم إن هذا السؤال شيء عجیب Tijani, nor his khalifahs! That leaves nothing except for us to know that it comes from Iblis alone, and no one else—it is one of his matters, may Allah’s curse be upon him. Question 9: What regarding Shaykh Ibrahim is denied? Answer : You have bewildered me with this question. Everything regarding him is denied—why not ask about what regarding him is accepted, since encompassing that is much easier to do? How could the points of denial regarding him be encompassed, given that Allah manifested Shaykh Ibrahim in this corrupt time in which people of ignorance and darkness have taken over, such people have thrown Shari’ah and Haqiqah behind their backs, and no one calls to Allah in this time except that he or she is met with rejection? If the times are such, and the caller is the greatest one to call to Allah after Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.) and the Prophet (s.a.w.s.), then how could we do what you have requested? Subhanallah al-Adhim. Indeed, this question is an extraordinary thing. Or do you not see how rare it is these days that you would say to one of the scholars of Shari’ah— who are to be the inheritors of the prophets in any given time— “Allah (t.) said…” and “The Messenger (s.a.w.s.) said…” and have him or her say to you anything except, “That’s disbelief”? It has not escaped you, dear questioner, that there is no good, nor any escape, except in the words of Allah and the words of His Messenger, for they are the life of the hearts. No one but a sincere believer takes hold of them, and no one but a misguided misguider turns away from them. As you know, Shaykh Ibrahim holds tightly onto them by his back teeth all day and all night, and neither bombs nor missiles can distract him from his commitment. No one loves him and relies on him except أو ما ترى أن علماء الشریعة الذین هم ورثة الأنبیاءفي زمن قل أن تقول لواحد منهم الیوم قال اﷲ تعالى وقال الرسول صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم إلا وقال لك ذلك كفر. ولا یخفى علیك أیها السائل الكریم أن لا خیر ولا نجاة إلا في كلام اﷲ وكلام رسوله فهما حیاة القلوب وما تمسك بهما إلا مؤمن مخلص وما حاد عنهما إلا ضال مضل، وكما تعلم أن الشیخ عاض علیهما بالنواجذ آناء اللیل وأط ارف النهار، لا تشوش علیه القنابل ولا الصوارخ ولا یحبه ولا یعتمد علیه إلا من یحب كلام اﷲ ورسوله ویعتمد علیهما، فإذاً لا معنى لتكذیبه وتضلیله وتكفیره، أو ما ترى ما دل علیه من متابعة النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم في الأقوال والأفعال والأحوال والمقامات والإسا ارءات إلى غیر ذلك من ما لا تنطق به الألسن ولا تكتبه الأقلام، سبحان اﷲ العظیم. أو ما أریت تآلیفه في الشریعة والطریقة والحقیقة، وأذكر ﷲ منها خاصة "رفع الملام" و"السر الأكبر،" فإذا طالعت رفع الملام تجده ما ترك دلیلا للفقهاء على تعصبهم لكل قول لا یؤیده الكتاب ولا السنة فمحي بذلك جمیع ما هم علیه، فقد جاء الحق وزهق الباطل، وٕإذا أریت السر الأكبر حرت ولو بلغت مقامها في تلك الفیوضات والمعارف والمشاهد والمقامات التي ما تكلم فیها ولي قبله ولن یتكلم فیها one who loves the words of Allah and His Messenger and relies on them. Therefore, all accusations of him being a liar, misguided, or heretical are baseless. Or do you not see how he calls for following the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in words, deeds, hals, maqams, night journeys, and other matters that neither tongues can mention nor pens write? Subhanallah alAdhim! ولي بعده إلا بإمداد منه، فواﷲ لن یصدقه فیما یق ولإلا من خاض بحور الحقیقة بح ار بح ار وجاب فیافیها قف از قف از أو منافق یصدق بلسانه ما لا یفهم بجنانه لیستر بصورة التصدیق جهله ویمیر أهله. Shari’ah, Tariqah, and Haqiqah? For the sake of Al- Or have you not seen his writings about والمدافع عنه وناصره ومؤیده وخاذل أعدائه لما قامت lah, I will mention in particular his works “Remov- له قائمة ولما كان ما كان ولیس في الإمكان أبدع مما were to look at “Removing the Blame,” you would ing the Blame” and “The Greatest Secret.” If you كان ، كفاه اﷲ شر أعدائه ونصره علیهم كما هو عادته proof by which they can justify their zealous adher- find that he has left the fiqh scholars without a single . تعالى ence to any opinion not supported by the Qur’an or ولولا أن المقام لا یسمح بما فوق الإشارة لزدتك sunnah, so everything they are on has been erased—Truth has come and falsehood has perished. And if . وبینت لك حتى إذا لو كشف الغطاء لما ازددت یقینا you would be bewildered, even if you had experi- you were to take a look at “The Greatest Secret,” enced the degree of effusions, points of ma’rifah, vi-sions, and maqams from which the writing speaks— السؤال العاشر: ما عٍندكم في قول الشیخ "فمن لي all of which no prior wali has ever talked about, nor بفتیان صدق یسجدون لمظهري"؟ from the Shaykh. By Allah, no one will believe what will any future wali talk about except through madad الجواب : أقول قبل كل شيء أن كلام الأولیاء لا یعلم he says except those who have plunged into the تأویله إلا اﷲ وال ارسخون في العلم یقولون آمنا به كل oceans of Haqiqah—ocean after ocean—and trav-ersed its deserts—leap after leap—or hypocrites . من عند ربنا، لأنه مع اﷲ دائما وله معه ثلاث أحوال who believe with the tongue but lack understanding in the heart, using the external appearance of belief طوار یكون مع اﷲ هو و ربما تكلم بلساٍن الحق to mask their own ignorance, and trying to gain كقول الجیلي "سبحاني ما أعظم شأني" جار مجرى some benefit for their families. The main point to take away from all of this is الأحادیث الربانیة ویتكلم بكلام في تلك الحضرة لا the Shaykh, defend him, come to his aid, assist him, that were it not Allah who was the one to preserve یعلمه إلا من یعلمها، كما هو واقع في فواتح السور لا and debase his enemies, nothing else would have یعلمها إلا من یفهم مدلولاتها حتى أن جبریل علیه have happened—as the saying goes, “nothing could propped him up, and what has happened would not السلام لما أتى النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم have occurred more spectacularly than what has oc-curred.” May Allah suffice him from the evil of his ب ﴿كٓ هیعٓ صٓ ﴾ صار النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم یقول enemies and aid him against them, as He (t.) usually عند كل حرف "عرفت" فعلم جبریل أنه بین الحضرتین does. Were it not for the fact that this situation does . سر لا یعلمه غیرهما not allow for anything to be said except allusions, I would give you more and explain things to you such والحاصل أن الشیخ لو لا أن اﷲ هو حافظه that, were the veil to be lifted, you would have no more certainty to reach. Question 10: What do you have to say about his words, “What sincere youth do I have who will prostrate to my مظھر ”? Answer : Before getting into anything, I would like to say that regarding the speech of the awliya’, “no one knows its explanation except Allah and those firmly rooted in knowledge say, ‘We believe in it— all is from the presence of our Lord’ ” (Qur’an 3:8), because the wali is always with Allah and may go through three possible states with Him. Sometimes, the wali is with Allah and will speak with the tongue of the Truth, such as when Jili said, “Exalted be Me, how immense is My affair.” In that case, the wali’s words are equivalent to a hadith qudsi, and what the wali says will only be understood by someone who knows that hadrah in which the wali stands. This is the case with the abbreviated letters at the beginning of surahs: no one understands them except the one who knows what they are indicating—even Jibril (a.s.), for when he came to the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) with “K.H.Y. ʿ . Ṣ .” (Qur’an 19:1), the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said at every abbreviated letter, “I know it,” and Jibril knew that between the two hadrahs was a secret unknown to anyone other than those two. Other times, the wali is occupying a maqam in regards to Allah, so the wali speaks with the tongue of his or her martabah. Most of the speech of the arifs is of this type, though it could be from the tongue of a temporary hal, or from the tongue of a permanent maqam. No one understands the speech of someone in a hal except those who know that hal, and similarly no one understands the speech of someone occupying a certain maqam except those who know that maqam—unless they are from the people of affirmation, which is a light that Allah places in the heart. The third state that the wali is seen to go through with Allah is when he or she speaks to people with the tongue of their own created existence وطوار الولي مع اﷲ الثاني من حیث مقام الوليفیتكلم الولي بلسان مرتبته وهذا هو جل كلام العارفین إلا أنه یكون الكلام طوار بلسان الحال وقد یكون بلسان المقام. ولا یفهم كلام صاحب الحال إلا من یعلم ذلك الحال وكذلك صاحب المقام لا یفهم كلامه إلا من یعرف مقامه إلا من كان من أهل التصدیق، فالتصدیق نور یجعله اﷲ في القلب. الطور الثالث من أطوار الولي مع اﷲ أن یتكلم للخلق بلسان خلقیتهم وما هم فیه حتى یصیر فیما یرون واحدا منهم مع العوام فیما هم فیه، ظاهره معهم وباطنه مع اﷲ وكلما لبس ثوبا غیر الذي یعلمون أنكروه وأنكروا علیه ورموه بالكفر والسحر والجنون لأنه تكلم بما لا یعلمون، أو لا یعلمون أن لِلقطب ستة عشر عالَ ما إحاطیا الدنیا والآخرة واحد من ت لْ كُم العوالم وهو یقدر أن یتكلم في الدینا من حیث لا یعلمون ویقدر أن یتكلم في الآخرة من حیث لا یعلمون ولا أظنهم یدعون الإحاطة بأمر واحد من أمور الدنیا فكیف بالآخرة فیكف بباقي العوالم، وٕإذا تقرر هذا فلا إشكال في عدم فهم العوام لكلام الأولیاء، فیكف بكلام قطب، فكیف بكلام خلیفة فأحرى كلام الخلیفة. فلا عجب في ذلك وٕإنما العجب كل العجب من تشوق العوام لفهم كلام أولیاء اﷲ تعالى وكلما سمعوا كلمة لم یفهموها بادروا بالإنكار والتكفیر والتضلیل تحكما منهم في ظاهر الأمر على الولي وفي الحقیقة إنما هو تحكم منهم على اﷲ وهم یتعجبون إذا لم یفهموا كلمة واحدة من كلام الولي، وٕإنما أتعجب كیف and whatever they are involved in, such that they see that he or she appears to have become one of the common people, with them in whatever they are doing: the wali is outwardly with them while inwardly with Allah. Yet every time the wali puts on a garment other that what they know, they deny it and deny the wali, accusing him or her of disbelief, magic, or madness. They do this when the wali speaks of something of which they have no knowledge—or do they not know that the qutb encompasses sixteen worlds, with the Dunya and the Akhirah being just one of those worlds? The qutb can speak simply about the Dunya in a way that others have no knowledge of, and I do not think that they ever claim to encompass even one matter of the Dunya, much less the Akhirah, so what about the other fifteen worlds? If this point is established, then there should be no issue with the generality of people not understanding what the awliya’ say, let alone a qutb, let alone a khalifah, and especially the speech of the Khalifah himself. So that should not be a cause for amazement. Rather, what is absolutely amazing is the longing that the generality of people have to understand the speech of Allah’s (t.) awliya’, yet every time they hear a word they do not understand, they rush to deny the wali and label him or her a disbeliever or misguided. They use the apparent aspect of the matter to make a judgment on the wali, while in reality it is nothing but a judgment they make on Allah. Then they are amazed when they do not understand a certain word from the wali’s speech; as for me, I wonder how they could understand any of it at all. What should be done with the speech of the awliya’ is to take whatever of it has an apparent and known meaning, and leave whatever of it has a hidden and unknown meaning. Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.) indicated this in one of his established sayings, “When you hear something from me, weigh it on the scale of Shari’ah: whatever is in accordance with Shari’ah, take it, and whatever goes against Shari’ah, leave it.” He (r.a.a.) did not order them to reject it or label it a lie—rather, he ordered them to leave it covered until someone who understands it can be found. When he said “whatever goes against Shari’ah,” he meant that which goes against Shari’ah in the mind of یفهمون كلمة واحدة من كلامه، فالذي یلیق في حقكلام الأولیاء أن یؤخذ منه ما ظهر وعرف ویترك ما خفي وجهل، وٕإلى هذا المعنى أشار الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه في قوله الثابت عنه "إذا سمعتم عني شیئا فزنوه بمی ازن الشرع فما وافق الشرع فخذ وه وما خالف الشرع فاتركوه" فما أمرهم رضي اﷲ عنه بإنكاره ولا تكذیبه وٕإنما أمرهم بتركه تحت الغطاء حتى یجد من یعرفه، أما قوله ما خالف الشرع فمعناه ما خالف الشرع في اعتقادِ مَن سمعه ممن لا یعلمه، لأن الشیخ التجاني لا یقول ما یخالف الشرع فحاشاه من ذلك، فمرتبته في الكمال فوق ذلك. أما بیت الشیخ حیث یقول "فمن لي بفتیان ٍصدق یسجدون لمظهري،" فاﷲ أعلم بم ارده في ذلك وأنا في نفسي لا أعلم من الشیخ ولا ممن أثق به من خلفائه هل الروایة باسم الفاعل أو باسم المفعول، وٕإن كانت الروایة بصیغة اسم الفاعل فلا إشكال فهذا تفهمه العوام وٕإن كان بصیغة اسم المفعول فإن كان الم ارد من السجود الخضوع كما في قوله تعالى ﴿وَإذَا قُ رِئَ عَلیْهمُ الْقرآنُ لَا یَسْجُدُ ونَ﴾ أي لا یخضعون فلا إشكال أیضا لأن السجود اللغوي لیس هو السجود العرفي الحقیقي، ولو سلمنا تسلیما جدلیا أن روایة البیت بصیغة اسٍم المفعول وأن الم ارد السجود الحقیقي فیكون الكلام جار مجرى المرتبة الأولى التي قررت، وهي كلام الولي حال كونه مع اﷲ من حیث هو، وعلى هذا التقدیر فیمكن لمن یكذب بأن الولي یتكلم بلسان الحق ویطعن في حدیث "كنت لسانه الذي ینطق به" أو لا یفهمه أصلا أن یتعرض لهذا لكن someone who hears but does not understand it, because Shaykh Tijani would not say anything that actually goes against Shari’ah—far removed be he from that, for his degree of perfection is high above it. As for Shaykh Ibrahim’s line of poetry in which he says, “What sincere youth do I have who will prostrate to my مظھر ,” Allah knows best what he meant by it. I myself know neither from the Shaykh, nor from any of the khalifahs of his whom I trust, an answer to: is مظھر an active or a passive participle? If it were an active participle (thus reading “prostrate to the one who manifested me”) then it is not problematic, for anyone can understand this. If it were in the form of a passive participle (thus reading “prostrate to what I have manifested” or “prostrate to my manifestation”) and if by “prostrate” he meant “show deference”—as in when Allah (t.) says, “And when the Qur’an is recited to them, they do not prostrate” (Qur’an 84:21), meaning they do not show deference to it—then it is also not problematic, since the original, literal meaning of the Arabic word for “prostrate” is not the physical action we associate it with now. And if for the sake of argument we conceded not only that the contested word in the poem is a passive participle, but also that the meaning is real prostration, then the speech runs the course of the first of the three ways that a wali can speak, which we established above: the speech of a wali who is completely with Allah as He is. With this as such, for those who deny that a wali can ever speak with the tongue of the Real and who find fault with the hadith in which Allah says “when I love someone…I become his or her tongue by which he or she speaks,” or who do not understand it to begin with, it is possible for them to oppose this, but with the condition that they oppose every wali who speaks by such a tongue. As for those who believe in some of those cases and disbelieve in others, there is really no difference between one case and another, so essentially they just believe in all that they understand and deny all that they do not understand. What a strange thing that for more than twenty years, we—whether old or young, knowledgeable or ignorant, murid or not—have busied ourselves with بشرط أن یتعرض لكل من تكلم بهذا اللسان من الأولیاء إلا أن یكون ممن یؤمن ببعض ویكفر ببعض، مع أنه لا فرق بین هذا وذاك، فالذي یفهمه یصدقه جمیعا والذي لا یفهمه یكذبه جمیعا. ومن العجیب أن هذا البیت منذ أزید من عشرین عاما ونحن نتعاطاه سواء الكبیر والصغیر والعالم والجاهل والمرید وغیره ولم أسمع من الجمیع إنسانا واحدا یستشكله إلا منذ عامین، والبیت كان مشهوار متداولا، كل من یحفظ الفاتحة من قبیلتنا یحفظه، فیا لیت شعري ما معنى هذا؟ هل كانوا لرضاهم ساكتین على دعوى الربوبیة ویصحبون من یدعیها ویمدحونه بالعلم والدین والولایة والمعرفة والقطبانیة والفردانیة والخلافة ووارثة الشیخ التجاني ویشهدون له بأنه هو صاحب الفیضة التي ذكر الشیخ التجاني إلى غیر ذلك مما لا یفي به القلم ولا القرطاس؟ أم كانوا ضالین ووجدوا هادیا فاهتدوا؟ وبالعكس أم ماذا؟ ولو سلم من العمه لما احتجنا إلى هذا، فالكفر كثیر دون دعوى الربوبیة ولا بد أن یتطور الكافر على كثیر من م ارحل الكفر قبل أن یصل إلى هذه المرتبة، ولا أعلم كاف ار ادعاها صریحا سوى فرعون وكلمة إبلیس له شهیرة: "أنا الذي ضللتك ما ادعیت الربوبیة"، ومعلوم أن شیئا من الكفر تقاعس عنه إبلیس لا یتج أر علیه مسلم یتلو كتاب اﷲ آناء اللیل وأط ارف النهار ویتدبره ویفسره من أوله إلى آخره في كل زمن ویرى ما فیه من الوعد والوعید ﴿فإَّ نهَا لَا تعْمَى ٱِلْأبْصَارُ وَ لٰكِ نْ تَعْ مَى ٱ لْ قُ لُوبُ ال َّ تِي فِي ٱ ُّ لص دُ ور ﴾ this line of poetry, anall these people I had not heard of a single person d before two years ago, from فحقیقة الحسد أنه داء عضالِ، وﷲ دِر الحِسِد ما who found issue with it. It was well-known and in أعدله یبدأ بصاحبه فقتله ﴿مَ نْ عَ م لَ صَ الحِ اً فَِ ل نَ فْس ِه rized the Fatihah memorized this line, so wide circulation; everyone in our tribe who memo-I wish I وَمَ نْ أَسَ اءَ فَ عَ لَ یْ هَا﴾، ﴿ وََ لا یَح یقُ ٱ لْ مَ كْرُ ٱل َّ س یئُ إَّ لا him in some way that caused them to be silent about knew what all this means. Were they pleased with ب أَهْ لِِه ﴾، ﴿ وَُ قلِ ٱعْ مَ لُوِْاْ فَسَ یَ رَىِِ ٱﷲُ عَِ مَ لَكُ مْ وََ رسُ وُلُ هُ his claim of divinity, such that they would associate وَِٱ لْمُ ِ وم نُونَ وَ سَ تُ رَُّ د ونَ إل ىٰ عَ الم ٱلْغَیْب وَٱ َّ لش هَ ادَ ة فَ یُ نَِّ ب ؤُكُ مْ with one who made such a claim and praise him for his knowledge, deen, wilayah, ma’rifah, status as the بمَ ا كُ نْ تُمْ تَ عْ مَلُ ونَ﴾، فشركما لخیركما الفداء—اللهم qutb and the fard, khilafah, and inheritance of : اهدنا فیمن هدیت وعافنا فیمن عافیت the owner of the Faydah that Shaykh Tijani had Shaykh Tijani, and would bear witness to his being رب إني صدقت كل ولي pen nor paper could do justice? Or were they astray, mentioned, in addition to other matters that neither ارعیا قدره بعین احتارم but then found a guide who put them on the right غیر أن ابن سالم هو سهمي path? Or was it the reverse, or what? If the matter were clear, we would not have وملاذي وعمدتي وٕإمامي needed all this fuss,disbelief that come before claiming divinity, and a 4 for there are many stages of ولنا دلیل عقلي لمن لا یزن إلا بموازن العقل disbeliever would naturally progress through differ- وهو أننا معشر تلامذة الشیخ نصدقه ونقلده في كل of disbelief. I know of no disbeliever who reached ent stages before arriving at such an advanced stage شيء دق أو جل ونتمثل أوامره، مع كثیر الافت ارء that stage and openly claimed divinity except Phar-aoh, and it is well known what Iblis said to him: علینا، لم یقل قائل أن أحدا سجد له قط، هذا الذي “Even I who misguided you did not claim divinity!” یزعم قد حفظ اﷲ منه أولیاءه ولعل السر في ذلك قوله Allah day and night, reflects on it, comments on all It is obvious that a Muslim who recites the book of صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، "اللهم لا تجعل قبري وثنا یعبد of it in threats it contains would not dare to approach such every season, and sees what promises and من بعدي،" إذ أولیاء اﷲ هم قبور أس ارره صلى اﷲ a height of disbelief that even Iblis shied away from. علیه وسلم، فصدور الأح ارر أي الذین تحرروا من رق “It is not eyes that go blind—rather, hearts within the breasts are what go blind” (Qur’an 22:46). النفس قبور الأس ارر، ولا سر إلا منه علیه الصلاة Good for envy—how just he is, that he starts with The reality of envy is that it is a chronic illness. ، والسلام ، وقد أشار الشیخ إلى هذا المعنى بقوله his owner and takes his or her life! “Those who do صدوري لأس ارر العارفین قبور،" ولا شك أن النبي " good do it for themselves, and those who do bad do it against themselves” (Qur’an 41:46 &amp; 45:15), “The صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم مجاب الدعوة وقد أعطي جوامع 35:43)evil plot catches no one but its plotters” (Qur’an , and “Say, ‘Act, for Allah will see what you الكلم ، ولفظة قبره شاملة للمعنیین أي قبره الحسي do, as will His Messenger, and the believers, and you وقبره المعنوي، ولهذا المعنى لا ترى ولیا ﷲ یعبد من the Seen, Who will then inform all of you about what will be returned to the Knower of the Unseen and . دونه you used to do’ ” (Qur’an 9:105). “Of you two, the 4 The sentence up to this point seems unclear in the original Arabic, so we have translated it as best as we could understand it. evil one of you is to be a sacrifice for the good one.” O Allah, guide us with those whom You have guided, and grant us well-being with those whom You have granted it to. Lord, indeed I have confirmed every wali, Heeding his or her status with an ethic of respect Except that in Ahmad Tijani lies my portion, My refuge, my pillar, and my imam For those who only weigh matters on the scales of the intellect, we have an additional rational proof: we, the students of the Shaykh, believe him and follow him in every matter, large or small, and we obey his commands, despite a large number of lies that have been told about us. No one has ever said that anyone has prostrated to him; Allah has protected His awliya’ from this allegation, and perhaps the secret to that lies in the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) saying, “O Allah, do not make my grave an idol to be worshipped after me.” Since the awliya’ of Allah are the graves of the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) secrets, then the chests of the liberated—i.e. liberated from servitude to the nafs—are the graves of secrets, and all secrets come from him (s.a.w.s.). Shaykh Ibrahim indicated this point in his saying, “My chests are, for the secrets of the arifs, graves.” There is also no doubt that the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) supplications are answered and that he was given the gift of comprehensive speech, so his use of the word “grave” encompasses both meanings, i.e. his literal grave and his figurative grave. For this reason, you do not see a wali of Allah worshipped beside Him. Another reason for this is that the wali’s da’irah is the da’irah of extinguishing: his or her task is to be completely extinguished in Allah’s (t.) Essence. He or she has no firm existence except that by which he or she is able to observe the guidelines of Shari’ah, as a protection from Allah lest he or she be turned away from the guidelines of Shari’ah and thereby fall away from Allah’s eye (may Allah protect us from His tribulation!). If you take issue with the fact that ومن الأسباب في ذلك أیضا أن الولي دائرته دائرة محو، فشأنه الانمحاء المطلق في ذات اﷲ تعالى، فلیس عنده من الإثبات إلا ما یؤدي به الأحكام الشرعیة حفظا من اﷲ له لئلا ینقلب عن الأحكام الشرعیة فیسقط من عین اﷲ—أعاذنا اﷲ من بلائه—وٕإن أشكل علیك كون الأولیاء ما عبد منهم أحد مع أن الأنبیاء صلوات اﷲ علیهم وسلامه عبد منهم البعض، فالجواب عنه أن الأنبیاء دائرتهم دائرة إثبات وقد سبق أن الأولیاء دائرتهم دائرة محو، فلهذا یوجد للنبي وجود یؤسس اﷲ به الشریعة والولي لیس بمشرع مع أن دعوة النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم لمن بعده من أمته—یوجد في المفضول ما لا یوجد في الفاضل. السؤال الحادي عشر: ما تقول في تیجانیة من ینتسب للشیخ التجاني ویصدقه ویكذب الشیخ إبارهیم ویضلله؟ الجواب : إني لا أفهم ذلك، لأن الشیخ ما جاء إلا بما جاء به الشیخ التجاني، وٕإن كانت الصورة عند من لا ینوي غیرها اقتضت الاثنینیة فالشيء المؤتى به واحد، فالشیخ التجاني ما أتى إلا دالا على اﷲ والرسول معب ار عن سر وحدانیة اﷲ تبارك وتعالى وسر أسمائه وصفاته، هذا هو هدفه الحقیقي والشیخ ما ازد على هذا ولا نقص، فمن كان منقادا إلى ما دعا إلیه الشیخ none of the awliya’ has been worshipped while several of the prophets (s.a.w.s.) have, then to respond to that: the prophets’ da’irah is the da’irah of firm existence, while it has already been mentioned that the awliya’s da’irah is the da’irah of extinguishing— therefore, each prophet has an existence upon which Allah can establish the Shari’ah, while the wali is not a lawgiver. Add to this the fact that the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) supplication was for those in his ummah who came after him—the less superior of the two has something the more superior does not. Question 11: What do you say regarding whether someone who attributes him- or herself to Shaykh Tijani and accepts him, while considering Shaykh Ibrahim to be a misguided liar, can be considered Tijani? Answer : I do not understand that at all, because Shaykh Ibrahim brought nothing except what Shaykh Tijani brought. Even if the physical form— for those for whom that is their sole aim—necessitates they be considered two separate people, what has been brought is one. Shaykh Tijani came only to guide others to Allah and His Messenger, expressing the secret of Allah’s (t.w.t.) oneness and the secret of His Names and Attributes; that was his true goal, and Shaykh Ibrahim neither added nor subtracted anything to it. So those who have been following what Shaykh Tijani called to and remain so, there is no way in which they can go against Shaykh Ibrahim in any matter, great or small. As for those who have only been following the same physical form, have no perception of anything else, and do not know that the Tijani tariqa is in fact a religious practice that involves following the practices and beliefs that Shaykh Tijani observed—not just following the physical form of Shaykh Tijani, or his children, or his khalifahs—then it is not surprising that those who fit this description would defy Shaykh Ibrahim, because Shaykh Tijani is white and Shaykh Ibrahim is black. But for the one who knows the truth, in fact the only difference between the two of them is the difference between the white and black parts of the eye. التجاني وما ازل منقادا إلیه لا یمكنه بحال من الأحوال أن یخالف الشیخ في أمر دق أو جل، أما من كان منقادا لنفس الصورة فقط ولا شعور له بغیرها ولا یعلم أن التجانیة حقیقة دین وتدین بما جاء به الشیخ التجاني لا صورة الشیخ التجاني ولا صورة أولاده ولا خلفائه، فلا غ اربة فیمن هذا وصفه إن خالف الشیخ لأن الشیخ التجاني أبیض اللون والشیخ أسود اللون. ولیس بینهما في الحقیقة عند من یعلمها إلا ما بین بیاض العین وسوادها، فالذي یدرك الذاتَ سوادُ العین بل سواد سوادها لا بیاضها ولا غیره من جمیع الوجود، ومن فهم ما أشرت إلیه یعلم أن السواد والبیاض لا فرق بینهما والفضل بید اﷲ یوتیه من یشاء والفیض الإلهي سائر دائما ولا یتقید بصورة، فلو تقید بها لما تجاوز آدم. ولا یتقید بحقیقة فلو تقید بها لما تجاوز الحقیقة المحمدیة ولا بلون ولا زمان ولا مكان ففضل اﷲ یتدفق دائما. السؤال الثاني عشر: ما الفرق بین ختمیة الشیخ التجاني وكتمیته؟ الجواب : أقول أن ختمیته هي مرتبته في ختمیة الولایة في دائرة الصفة حال كونه نائبا عن رسول اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم في هذا المقام، فهو ممد جمیع الأولیاء من هذه المرتبة، وٕإلى هذه المرتبة أشار رضي اﷲ عنه، "روحي وروحه صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم كهاتین، روحه صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم تمد الأنبیاء والمرسلین وروحي تمد الأقطاب والعارفین." وأما كتمیته رضي اﷲ عنه فإنها مرتبة الولایة الخاصة به The part that perceives the Essence is the black of the eye—or rather, the black of the black—and not the white of it, nor anything else in all of existence. Whoever understands what I have alluded to knows that there is no difference between the blackness and the whiteness. Grace is in Allah’s hand—He gives it to whom He wills. The divine flood always flows and is not limited to a particular physical form—were it to have been, it would not have continued past Adam; nor is it limited to a particular haqiqah—were it to have been, it would not have continued past the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah; nor is it limited to a particular color of skin, time, or place. Allah’s grace constantly pours forth. Question 12: What is the difference between Shaykh Tijani’s sealhood and his concealedness? Answer : I say that his sealhood is his martabah in the sealhood of wilayah, in the da’irah of the Attribute, in his state of being a representative of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in this maqam. From this martabah, he is the one who gives madad to all the awliya’, and it is this martabah that he (r.a.a.) was indicating when he said, “My ruh and his (s.a.w.s.) ruh are like these two fingers—his (s.a.w.s.) ruh gives madad to the prophets and messengers, and my ruh gives madad to the qutbs and the arifs.” As for his (r.a.a.) concealedness, it is the martabah particular to wilayah, in regards to his wilayah in the da’irah of the Name. It is this that he (r.a.a) was indicating when he said, “Whoever knows me knows me alone,” and, “We have a martabah that reaches so high that it is forbidden to either mention it or divulge it, and I’m not referring to what I have already mentioned to you…” He thereby concealed it, so we know that it is the martabah of his concealedness. In other words, I say that the first is the martabah of his giving madad, and the second is the martabah of his receiving madad. Or, to put it differently, the first is the martabah of his hiddenness, and the other is the martabah of his hiddenness’ hiddenness. He (r.a.a.) indicated both of them together when he said, “These two feet of mine are on the neck of من حیث ولایته في دائرة الاسم وٕإلیها أشار رضي اﷲ عنه بقوله، "من یعرفني یعرفني وحدي" وبقوله، "لنا مرتبة تناهت في العلو إلى محل یحرم ذكره وٕإفشاءه ولیس هو ما ذكرت لكم...إلخ" فإنه كتمها فعلمنا أنها مرتبة كتمیته، وأقول بعبارة أخرى إن الأولى مرتبة إمداده والثانیة مرتبة استمداده، وبعبارة أخرى الأولى مرتبة بط ونه والأخرى مرتبة بطون بطونه، وقد أشار إلیهما معا بقوله رضي اﷲ عنه، "قدماي هاتان على رقبة كل ولي ﷲ من لدن آدم إلى النفخ في الصور"—إلى غیر هذا مما لا یكتب في الأوارق ولا ینظر بالأحداق، جعلنا اﷲ وٕإیاكم من خاصته الخاصة من أصحابه وأحبابه. السؤال الثالث عشر: ما الفرق بین الاسم والصفة والخلیفة؟ الجواب : إن الاسم حیث أطلق في كلام الأولیاء الم ارد به اسم المرتبة، فهو الاسم الجامع لجمیع الأسماء العلویة وهو تجلي الحق بالموجودات، وهذه هي الوحدة، وبعبارة أخرى هي الحقیقة المحمدیة وهي اللاهوت وهي الظهور والصفة أیضا حیث أطلقت في كلامهم هي ظل الاسم ومرتبته الجامعة بجمیع الصفات وهي محمدیته صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم عندهم وتتنزل في كامل العصر، فكأن كامل العصر في كل زمان هو سید الوجود بالنیابة، وكما أن محمدیته ظله فكذلك كامل العصر ظله، وٕإلى ظلیة محمدیته أشار أویس القرني بقوله، "ما أریتم من رسول اﷲ إلا every wali of Allah, from Adam until the time the horn is blown,” as well as other statements of his that can be neither written on pages nor looked at by human eyes. May Allah make us and all of you from among the unique elect of his companions and beloveds. Question 13: What is the difference between the Name, the Attribute, and the Khalifah? Answer : In the speech of the awliya’, when “the Name” is used, what is meant by it is the name of the martabah—it is the name that gathers all celestial names in one, it is the manifestation of the Truth through all that exists, and this is unity. In other words, it is the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah, Lahut, manifestness. The Attribute, as well—when it is used in the speech of the awliya’—is the shadow of the Name and its martabah, gathering all attributes in one; according to the awliya’, it is his (s.a.w.s.) Muhammadiyyah, and it descends into the perfect man of the age. It is as if the perfect man of the age in every time stands in as the master of existence, and just as his Muhammadiyyah is his shadow, similarly the perfect man of the age is his shadow. Uwais alQarni indicated the shadowness of his Muhammadiyyah when he said, “You have seen only the shadow of the Messenger of Allah,” meaning that they knew the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah yet had not seen it, because seeing it is not possible until the Akhirah. As for the khilafah, it may in fact be a synonym for what comes before it, or it may be distinct from it, in that it is only its martabah. So that brings us back to its being an expression for the perfect man of the age, who is termed the Khalifah because he is neither the Name, nor the Attribute—rather, he is a khalifah of both the Name and the Attribute. It is these martabahs that Sidi Abdul-Qadir al-Jili was talking about when he said: Allah has, after name and description, a madhhar Yet the slumbering eyes of creatures are unable to see it In saying “a madhhar,” he (r.a.a.) meant himself, as he was the owner of this martabah in his time— ظله"—یعني أنهم عرفوا الحقیقة المحمدیة وما أروها، لأن رؤیتها لا تمكن قبل الآخرة. وأما الخلافة فقد تكون م اردفة في الحقیقة للتي قبلها وقد تتمیز عنها بأنها مرتبتها فقط فترجع إلى أنها عبارة عن كامل العصر، ویعبر عنه بالخلیفة لأنه لیس هو الاسم ولیس هو الصفة فسمي الخلیفة لأنه خلیفة الصفة والاسم وهذه الم ارتب هي التي عبر عنها سیدي عبد القادر الجیلي في قوله: فلله خلف الاسم والوصف مظهر وعنه عیون العالمین هواجع وقوله رضي اﷲ عنه "مظهر" یعني نفسه فهو صاحب هذه المرتبة في زمنه ولذلك جعله نكرة ولاتصافه بهذا المقام ادعى الختمیة رضي اﷲ عنه حیث أنه صار ظلا لظله علیه الصلاة والسلام وغاب عنه أن صاحب الختمیة ظل حقیقي لا صوري فقط، ونحن أصحاب الشیخ التجاني نفهم هذا البیت فهما خاصا بنا، وكذلك كلام الكمل كل أحد یفهمه بحسب حاله ویظن أنه ما أرید به إلا ما عنده هو، ومما نقول فیه أن الاسم حیث أطلق اسم الذات وأن الوصف اسم المرتبة وأن المظهر الخلیفة عبد اﷲ فیرى الحق تجلي الحق بالموجودات، والاسم تجلیه وارء الموجودات، والخلافة هو المرتبة الجامعة بین المرتبتین ولها نسبتان نسبة تناسب الصفة ونسبة تناسب الاسم تشیر إلیها نسبة القلب من حیث أنه جامع بین الروح والجسد، باطنه یناسب الروح وظاهره یناسب الجسد، كما أن الروح والجسم یشی ارن إلى الصفة والاسم وٕإذا أردنا أن نجمع بین المقامین هذا وذاك فنقول إن الاسم hence why he made it grammatically indefinite. Because of this maqam being attributed to him, he (r.a.a.) claimed sealhood—i.e. claimed to have become a shadow to the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) shadow— yet he did not perceive that the true owner of sealhood is a real shadow, and not just a shadow in appearance. We, the companions of Shaykh Tijani, understand this line of poetry in a way that is unique to us, and thus is the speech of the complete ones: everyone has a level of understanding according to his or her hal and thinks that the only thing meant was what he or she has understood. One thing we can say regarding the line is that the term “name” as used means the Name of the Essence, “description” is the name of the martabah, and “madhhar” is the Khalifah, the slave of Allah. Thus the Truth sees the manifestation of the Truth through existent entities, while the Name is its manifestation behind existent entities, and the khilafah is the martabah that joins between the other two martabahs and has two nisbahs: a nisbah corresponding to the Attribute, and a nisbah corresponding to the Name. The nisbah of the heart provides an indication for this, in that it joins between the ruh and the body: its hidden part corresponds to the ruh, while its manifest part corresponds to the body. The ruh and the body also are indications of the Attribute and the Name. If we wanted to join between both maqams, we would say that the Greatest Name has a reality, a meaning, and an outer form. It becomes manifest as an utterance with all of its nisbahs in every da’irah, and the people of each da’irah see of it whatever is suitable for their hals and maqams. Every name of Allah is “the Greatest,” for every name of His (t.) has its greatness that is seen by the one who sees the name. Therefore there is much difference of opinion regarding the name: some say the name is this, some say it is that, others say it is something else—and all are right. If this point is established, we realize that the companions of Shaykh Tijani have spoken about “the name” in regards to the name unique to them, and others have spoken about the name that they see. Each of the two names has an even and an odd, and the even and odd for us is what we have mentioned, while the even and odd for others is what الأعظم له حقیقة ومعنى وصورة ولفظا یتجلى بجمیع نسبه في كل دائرة، وكل أهل دائرة یرون منه ما یناسب أحوالهم ومقاماتهم، وأسماء اﷲ كلها أعظم، فكل اسم من أسمائه تعالى عنده أعظمیة ی ارها من ی اره، ولهذا كثر الخلاف في الاسم، فمنهم من یقول إن الاسم كذا ومنهم من یقول كذا ومنهم من یقول كذا، والكل حق، وٕإذا تقرر هذا ندرك أن أصحاب الشیخ التجاني تكلموا على الاسم من حیث الاسم الخاص بهم، وغیرهم تكلم على الاسم الذي یرى، ولكل الاسمین شفع ووتر، والشفع والوتر عندنا ما ذكرنا والشفع والوتر عندهم ما ذكر ابن عربي ومعناه عندهم ما بینت أولا. السؤال الاربع عشر: ما الفرق بین الخلیفة والقطب؟ الجواب : أقول إن القطبانیة مرتبة خلقیة تتوارثها الأقطاب واحدا بعد واحد وكما أنها تنتقل من شخص لآخر فكذلك تنتقل من دائرة لدائرة، فبعض الأقطاب دائرته الصفة لكن لا یكون إلا في نسبتها وتر بینها، وبعضهم یكون في دائرة الاسم ولا یكون أیضا إلا في نسبة الوتر منها، ثم كذلك. أما الخلافة فإنها دائرة حقیة وصاحبها واحد لم یسبق إلیها ولن تورث بعده، وهي في نفسها حقیقة فدائرتها هي آخریة الحقائق إیجادا وٕإمدادا، وعندها الوساطة المطلقة فیها فقطب الأقطاب نسبة واحدة من م ارتب الخلیفة، وٕإلى المعنى أشار العارف باﷲ محمد الحافظ بن فتى رضي اﷲ عنه حیث یقول: یقولون لي برهام قطب وانما Ibn Arabi has mentioned, and its meaning for them is what I explained in the beginning. Question 14: What is the difference between the Khalifah and the Qutb? Answer : I say that Qutbaniyyah is a martabah of the creation that the qutbs inherit from each other, one after another. Just as it moves from one person to another, it moves from one da’irah to another, so the da’irah of some of the qutbs will be the Attribute (though this attribution will only be completely true for one of them), for others it will be the Name (while with this as well, its full attribution will only be for one of them), and so on. As for Khilafah, this is a da’irah of the Truth and its owner is one— no one had it before him, nor will anyone have it after him. It is in itself a haqiqah whose da’irah is the lastness of all the haqa’iq in terms of both existence and madad, and it has within it the absolute intermediary, so “the qutb of qutbs” is one nisbah of the martabahs of the khalifah. The arif Muhammad al-Hafiz b. Feten (r.a.a.) indicated this when he said: They say to me that Ibrahim is a qutb—rather The qutbs are part of the dominion of a lowly servant of his And if you said, “Nay, he’s the qutb of the qutbs of his time” Then you’d still be as ignorant as you were before But he is the greatest manifestation of the Essence His comprehensive wilayah is over every servant of God A lighthouse through which Allah guides to His Essence And turns those not guided away from their misguidance The qutb is not a haqiqah, for several reasons, such as what I mentioned above about Qutbaniyyah moving from one da’irah to another and from one person to another. Also, the haqiqah must have an existence unique to it—either firstness, lastness, manifestness, or hiddenness—and firstness is for the Hahut, lastness for the Lahut, manifestness for the Jabrut, and hiddenness for the Malakut. So if the qutb were to say to us, “I have a firstness, which is my secret; a lastness, which is my ruh; a manifestness, which is my body; and a hiddenness, which is my heart,” we would say to him, “Nothing of existence remains yours if firstness were to take its first- غ لَُْ یمُ ه الأقطاب بعض إیالته وان قلت بل قطب لأقطاب عصره فما زلت فیما كنته من جهالته ولكنه للذات أعظم مظهر على كل مألوه عموم ولایته منار به یهدي الإله لذاته ویصرف من لا یهتدي من غوایته والقطب لیس بحقیقة لأمور منها ما تقدم من انتقال القطبانیة من دائرة إلى دائرة ومن إنسان إلى إنسان آخر، ومنها أن الحقیقة لا بد أن یكون لها وجود خاص بها من أولیة وآخریة أو ظهور أو بطون، فالأولیة للهاهوت، والآخریة للاهوت، والظاهریة للجبروت، والباطنیة للملكوت، فإذا قال لنا القطب أنا عندي أولیة هي سري وعندي آخریة هي روحي وعندي ظاهریة هي شبحي وعندي باطنیة هي قلبي، نقول له ما یبقى عندك وجود إذا أخذَت الأولیة أولیتها والآخریة آخریتها والظاهریة ظاهریتها والباطنیة باطنیتها فلا یجد جوابا. وبما تقدم تعلم أن القطب لیس بحقیقة لكنه سید قومه والخلیفة فوق ذلك بم ارحل وتشیر صلاة الفاتح إلى البعض منها—اللهم صل على سیدنا محمد وهي بارزة من الذات فافهم رزقنا اﷲ فهم أس ارره. السؤال الخامس عشر: هل الحقائق أربع لا تزید ولا تنقص أزلا وأبدا أم هي بحسب الأحوال والوسائط؟ الجواب : إنها أربع لا تزید ولا تنقص، وقد تقدم ط رف من هذا المعنى عند الكلام عن الفرق بین القطب ness, lastness its lastness, manifestness its manifest-ness, and hiddenness its hiddenness,” and he would والخلیفة ، وها أنا أتكلم لك على سر الإیجاد والإمداد find nothing to say to that. لتفهم سر تعدد الحقائق ولتفهم السبب في كونها أربعا know that the qutb is not a haqiqah, but he is the From what has been mentioned above, you can . فقط sayyid of his people, and the khalifah is several stages above that. Salatul-Fatihi indicates some of this: O فأقول إن الذات العلیة كانت ولا شيء غیرها Allah, send salah upon Sayyiduna Muhammad—the ، وهي الآن على ما علیه كانت، فأ اردت التعرف Allah grant us understanding of His secretssalah emerges from the Essence, understand. May . فتجلت في نفسها لنفسها بنفسها، هذا التجلي هو المعبر عنه بالأحدیة ولا فرق بینه وبین الذات، أي لا Question 15: Are the haqa’iq always four— ، نسبة فیه، ثم تجلت بالواحدیة، فهي أول كون تك ون never having been more or less, nor will theyever be—or does that change according to فیها ظهرت أسماء اﷲ وصفاته وتكونت الحقائق وبرزت في حضرة عالم الأمر قبل وجود آدم كما ? states and means Answer : They are indeed four—no more, no less— یشیر إلیه الحدیث، "كنت نبیا عالما بنبوتي وآدم بین and part of this has been mentioned above, in the words about the difference between the qutb and الماء والطین،" وقد أشار إلیه الشیخ التجاني رضي the khalifah. Here I shall speak to you about the se- اﷲ عنه: "كنت ولیا عالما بولایتي وآدم بین الماء may understand the secret involved in there being cret of how existence and madad works, so that you والطین ." لإیجاد هذه الحقائق والنسب أوجد اﷲ الحقیقة their being only four. multiple haqa’iq, and understand the reason behind المحمدیة، فل ولاها ما ظهرت نسبة ﷲ ولا عُرفت، ولهذا I say that the Exalted Essence was and there "، أشار الشیخ بقوله، "فلولاك یبقى الحق حقا وما دري fore. It wanted to be known, so it manifested in it-was nothing other than it, and it is now as it was be- إذ لیس قبل هذا التجلي إلا الأحدیة وتلك لا نسبة self, for itself, through termed Ahadiyyah, and there is no difference be-itself; this manifestation is فیها ، فسر التعرف المطلق هو الذي أظهر اﷲ له tween it and the Essence, i.e. it has no nisbah. Then . الحقیقة المحمدیة والحمد ﷲ رب العالمین first thing to be, in which appeared Allah’s Names it manifested through Wahidiyyah, and so that is the أما الثالثة فالسر فیها التنزل لدائرة الأسماء من and Attributes. The haqa’iq came to be and emerged in the presence of the spiritual realm before the ex- حیث هي وارء الموجودات لیتم التعرف والتعارف istence of Adam, as the hadith indicates: “I was a ویحصل التعقل وتبرز صور الأشیاء ویظهر خطاب was between water and clay.” Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.) prophet, aware of my prophethood, when Adam الحكمة وكأنها تمثال لما سبق، فهي الظل الممدود indicated this as well: “I was a wali, aware of my wila-yah, when Adam was between water and clay.” To والبرزخ الموجود، فنفس هذا التجلي هو ظل المحمدیة bring these haqa’iq and nisbahs into existence, Allah وهو عین ختمیتها وم ارتبها الجامعة لجمیع أسمائها ence, so were it not for that haqiqah, no nisbah of brought the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah into exist- وصفاتها، فكما أن الحقیقة المحمدیة ظهرت لیعرف Allah would have become manifest or been known. بها التجلي الذي قبلها فكذلك هذه الحقیقة ظهرت Shaykh Ibrahim indicated this in saying, “So if not for you, the Truth would have remained Truth and never been known;” therefore, there is nothing before this particular manifestation except Ahadiyyah, which has no nisbah. The secret of why Allah manifested the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah is so that He might be absolutely known. Al-Hamdu Lillah, Rabbil-Alamin. As for the third one, the secret in it is the descent to the da’irah of the Names inasmuch as they are behind all existent entities, so that knowledge of self and others could be completed, comprehension could happen, the external forms of things could appear, and the speaking of wisdom could be manifest. It is almost like a statue of what preceded it; it is the extended shadow and the existent barzakh. This selfsame manifestation is the shadow of Muhammadiyyah and the wellspring of Muhammadiyyah’s sealhood and martabahs, which gather all its Names and Attributes. Just as the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah appeared so that the manifestation that is before it could be known, this haqiqah appeared so that the Haqiqah Muhammadiyyah could be known—that is why Allah brought it into existence in pre-eternity and made it appear in post-eternity. As for the fourth haqiqah, what we would say about it is exactly what we said about the previous one, letter by letter, and the only thing to add would be its inseparability from the two previously mentioned haqiqahs. It is distinguished by its being the da’irah of perfection, i.e. in it are manifest the absolute Names and the absolute Attributes, and it gives everything that has a right its right. It is not the madhhar of the Name, which would make it fettered by names; nor is it the madhhar of the Attribute, which would make it fettered by attributes—this is how it is the madhhar of perfection. And you know quite well that the madhhars are three, while that which appears through the madhhars is one. The first madhhar is the madhhar of beauty, the second madhhar is that of might, and this madhhar is that of perfection. The arif of Allah Abdullah bin al-Hajj (r.a.a.) indicated this in some lines of poetry: And the arifs have witnessed perfection for Him Without the madhhar of might or beauty He (r.a.a.) used to say, “The second half of this line has something that should be critiqued, and I would love to find someone to critique it,” meaning that he لتعرف بها الحقیقة المحمدیة، لهذا أوجدها اﷲ أزلا وأظهرها أبدا. أما الحقیقة ال اربعة فكما سبق حرف بحرف ولا فرق إلا لعدم تمییزها عن الحقیقتین اللتین سبق ذكرهما، تمیزت بأنها هي دائرة الكمال أي تظهر فیها الأسماء المطلقة والصفات المطلقة وتعطي كل ذي حق حقه، لیست مظهر اسم فتتقید بالأسماء ولا مظهر صفة فتتقید بالصفات، فهذا هو كونه مظهر الكمال، ولا یخفى علیك أن المظاهر ثلاثة والمتظاهر واحد، فالمظهر الأول هو مظهر الجمال والمظهر الثاني هو مظهر الجلال، وهذا هو مظهر الكمال، ولهذا المعنى أشار العارف باﷲ عبد اﷲ بن الحاج بقوله في أبیات رضي اﷲ عنه: والعارفون شهدوا له الكمال من غیر مظهر الجلال والجمال وكان رضي اﷲ عنه یقول، "هذا الشطر فیه انتقاد وأحب أن أجد من ینتقده"—یعني ك ونه جعل مظهر الكمال كائنا من غیر مظهر الجلال والجمال، وهذا لا یصح، فما كان مظه ار إلا بهما، فلولاهما لما كان، ومثال هذا كما نقول في الآن الدائم، فمن قال إنه من غیر اللیل والنهار فقد أخطأ لأنه متكون منهما، وقل من یفهم الآن الدائم لقربه وخفائه في اللیل والنهار، وكذلك مظهر الكمال أن یظهر على حقیقته كامل، فقد احتجب بالاسم والصفة كما احتجب الآن الدائم باللیل والنهار. put the madhhar of perfection as separate from the madhhar of might and beauty, which is not correct. This is because it is only a madhhar by means of the other two, so were it not for the other two, it would not be. A metaphor for this is the ever-present now, as we say: whoever says that it is something other than night and day is mistaken, since it consists of both of them, and how few really understand the ever-present now, because of its proximity to and its being hidden within night and day. Similarly, the madhhar of perfection seems complete when it appears in its true reality, for it is disguised by the Name and the Attribute just as the ever-present now is disguised by the night and the day. These three madhhars are the root and hidden reality of all things, from the first manifestations to the last. The Truth indicates this in His (t.w.t.) saying, “O humankind, We have created you from a male and a female” (Qur’an 49:13)—the “male” is in reality the Name, and the “female” is in reality the Attribute, and if you were to say that the third is yet to be mentioned, I would say that the third is the male and female together, because in terms of Name it is male, and in terms of Attribute it is female. A similar passage is, “It comes out from between the loins and the ribs” (Qur’an 86:7): from between the loins of the Name and the ribs of the Attribute, just like the previous example. There is also an indication of this set in terms of earthly forms: Allah created Adam without father or mother, like Muhammadiyyah; He created Hawa’ from a father but not a mother, like Ahmadiyyah; and He created Isa without a father, like the khalifah. And regardless of these stages of descent, the slave was supplied with hamd. Making a riddle from the first and second of these hadrahs, my father (r.a.a.) said, “What are two ancient, new attributes whose madhhar is the Dunya and the Akhirah?” He would disguise his words for the generality of people by saying to them, “I mean night and day”—that is what he would say. These two hadrahs are the true reality of night and day, and they are the origin of every pair: “And We have created pairs from everything, so that you might remember. So flee to Allah—truly I am for you a clear warner from Him. Do not set beside Allah another وهذه المظاهر الثلاثة هي أصل الأشیاء وخفا ؤها من أول التجلیات إلى آخرها، وقد أشار الحق لهذا بقوله تبارك وتعالى ﴿ یَا أُّ َیهَا ٱ َّ لناسُ إَِّ نا خَلقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُُنْثى﴾، فالذكر في الحقیقة الاسم، والأنثى في الحقیقة الصفة، وٕإن قلت بقي ذكر الثالثة أقول الثالثة هي الذكر والأنثى لأنها من حیث الاسم ذكر ومن حِیث الصِفة أنثى، وكذلك ﴿منْ بَیِْن ٱ ُّ لصلْب وَٱلتَّ رائ ب﴾: بین صلب الاسم وتارئب الصفة على النمط السابق. ولهذا إشارة صوریة، وهي أن اﷲ خلق آدم دون أب وأم وكذلك المحمدیة، وخلق حواء من أب دون أم وكذلك الأحمدیة وخلق عیسى دون أب وكذلك الخلیفة، وبقطع النظر عن التنزلات أُ مِ َّ د العبد بالحمد. وقد ألغز بالأولى والثانیة من هذه الحض ارت الوالد رضي اﷲ عنه: "ما صفتان قدیمتان حدیثتان مظهرهما الدنیا والآخرة؟" ویلبس على العوام بأن یقول لهم أعني اللیل والنهار وكذلك كما قال فهاتان الحضرتان هما حقیِقِة اللیل والنٍهار، وهما أصِل كل زوجین ﴿ وَمِ نْ كُِّ لِ شَ يْ ءِ خَ لَقْ نَ ا زَْ وِجَ یْن لعَ لَّ كُ مْ تَذَ َّ ك رُونَ ۞ ففُّ روا إلى ٱﷲ إِّ ني لَكُمْ منْهُ نَذیرٌ مُ بینٌ ۞ ولَا تَجِْعَلوا مَعَ ٱﷲِ إِلهاً آخَرَ إِِّ ني لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِیرٌ مُبینٌ ﴾ صدق اﷲ العظیم. وكنت ذات یوم أتكلم مع سیدي محمد الحافظ بن فتى وأتذاكر معه في فهم كلام اﷲ god—truly I am for you a clear warner from Him” (Qur’an 51:49-51). Allah, the Immense, has spoken the truth. I was speaking one day with Sidi Muhammad alHafiz b. Feten and reviewing with him my understanding of Allah’s speech, when he said to me that my father (r.a.a.) had said to him that he was able to extract all the meanings of the Qur’an from His (t.) words, “Two men said” (Qur’an 5:23). Then I said to him that I was able to do that with His (t.) words, “And one man said” (Qur’an 40:28). Regarding what my father had said, I explained that he meant the “two men” who are the madhhar of the two attributes that he used to allude to in that riddle, namely the madhhar of beauty and of might; then I added that those two have a third—the madhhar of perfection—which I explained clearly to him. It is along these lines that Shaykh Ibrahim (r.a.a.) says: I got lost with him one day, then another day, then a third It is none other than the Prophet taking us on a night journey To realms whose secret I divulge neither Negligently nor intentionally, to neither Zayd nor Umar The way he expresses this—by saying “a third”—contains the utmost of adab, concealment, and perfection. In terms of adab: he did not describe this last haqiqah like he did the two before it, out of adab with it. In terms of concealment: the expression he used for it was neither “day” nor “night” nor “ever-present now,” so that the matter remain concealed and everyone who has a maqam take from it what is suitable for his or her maqam—so the one who sees it as a day will make “a third” a reference to a day, and so on; there are so many meanings that, were we to follow all of them, it would take us far off topic. From the perspective of perfection: he refers to this martabah as neither day, nor night, nor name, nor attribute, and “a third” is the complete phrase that indicates its perfection, even if it had no need for an indication: And how could anything have a firm hold in the mind When daylight is in need of a proof? And there is nothing in these three madhhars except the Master of Existence (s.a.w.s.), for he is the all from whence all comes: the first is the martabah of his manifestness, the second is the martabah of his hiddenness, and the other one is the martabah حتى قال لي إن الوالد رضي اﷲ عنه قال له إنه یقدر أن یخرج جمیعِ معاني القرآن من قوله تعالى ﴿قالَ رَجُلَان ﴾ فقلت له وأنا أقدر أن أفعل ذلك من قوله تعالى ﴿وَقَالَ رَجُلٌ ﴾ فشرحت معنى قول الوالد بأنه یعني الرجلین اللذین هما مظهر الصفتین اللتین ألغز بهما أي مظهر الجمال والجلال وزدت على الشرح بینت له أن لهما ثالثا وهو مظهر الكمال وفي هذا المعنى یقول الشیخ: ضللت به یوما ویوما وثالثا وما هو إلا والنبي بنا یسري إلى حضارت لا أبوح بسرها بسهو ولا عمد لزید ولا عمر وفي تعبیره بقوله "ثالثا" غایة الأدب والكتمان والكمال: من حیث الأدب ما وصف هذه الحقیقة بمثل ما وصف به اللتین قبلها أدبا منه، ومن حیث الكتمان ما عبر بیوم ولا لیلة ولا آن دائم لیبقى الأمر مكتوما ولیأخذ كل ذي مقام ما یناسب مقامه .فمن ی اره یوما یجعل ثالثا وصفا لیوم إلى غیر ذلك من المعاني التي لو تتبعناها لأدى بنا ذلك إلى الخروج عما نحن بصدده، ومن جهة الكمال فهذه المرتبة لا یعبر عنها بالیوم ولا باللیلة ولا بالاسم ولا بالصفة وثالثا هي العبارة التامة الدالة على كماله، وٕإن كان لا یحتاج إلى دلیل: وكیف یصح في الأذهان شيء of the hiddenness of his hiddenness. All the wirds of Shaykh Tijani contain mention of these three, as attributes for Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.s.); Shaykh Tijani’s wirds have come for no other reason than to translate for us who the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is, and to acquaint us with his maqam. For this reason, you do not see in his wirds anything except indications of the Master of Existence or one of his martabahs. I shall start with Salatul-Fatihi: “O Allah, send salah upon Sayyiduna Muhammad, the Opener…, the Seal…, the Guide…” All of these are descriptions for him (s.a.w.s.); his descriptions in the outward correspond to how he is, his descriptions in the inward correspond to his inwardness, his descriptions in the inward of the inward correspond to the inwardness of his inwardness, and that is all there is. Secondly, I refer to Jawharat al-Kamal, which proceeds in the same way: “O Allah, send salah upon the wellspring of mercy…O Allah, send salah upon the wellspring of Truth…O Allah, send salah upon the emergence of the Truth by the Truth…”—it follows exactly in the footsteps of Salatul-Fatihi, understood?…The list of examples could go on and on— it would never be exhausted, nor fully written on pages, nor seen by eyes. No matter how much we mention out of gratitude, we still have Knowledges too exalted to ever be confined by paper Therefore, given everything aforementioned, any thought of a fifth haqiqah has proven to be false from every angle. Success is through Allah alone, and He is the One Who guides to the straight path out of His generosity. O Allah, show us Truth as truth and allow us to follow it, and show us falsehood as falsehood and allow us to avoid it. Were I to go on about everything I have to say about how there can be no fifth haqiqah, I would need volumes. This is what time has permitted. Question 16: What is the meaning of Shaykh Tijani’s words, “A man from the group who is not known in the Dunya, nor in the Akhirah”? Answer : I say that something Shaykh Tijani kept hidden is best kept hidden. By concealing it, it is understood that he means the owner of concealedness. متى احتاج النهار إلى دلیل وهذه المظاهر الثلاثة ما فیها إلا سید الوجود صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، فهو الكل منه الكل، فالأولى مرتبة ظهوره، والثانیة مرتبة بطونه، والأخرى مرتبة بطون بطونه، وقد جاء ذكرها في جمیع أوارد الشیخ التجاني من حیث أنها صفات لرسول اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، وأوارد الشیخ التجاني ما جاءت إلا لتت رجم لنا عنه صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، والتعریف بمقامه ولذلك لا ترى في أوارده إلا ما یدل على سید الوجود أو مرتبة من م ارتبه وأبدأ بصلاة الفاتح: "اللهم صل على سیدنا محمد الفاتح، الخاتم، الهادي"—فكل هذه أوصافه صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، وأوصافه في الظاهر من حیث هو وأوصافه في الباطن من حیث بطونه وأوصافه في باطن الباطن من حیث بطون بطونه وما ثم غیره...وأثنّي بجوهرة الكمال فهي كذلك أیضا: "اللهم صل على عین الرحمة...اللهم صل على عین الحق...اللهم صل على طلعة الحق بالحق"—فهي سائرة على أقدام صلاة الفاتح حذو النعل بالنعل، فافهم...إلى غیر هذا مما لا یمكن حصوره ولا یكتب في الأوارق ولا ینظر بالأحداق. ومهما تحد ثنا لشكر فعندنا علوم تعالت أن تقید في طرس As for this man’s not being known iin the Akhirah, it means that his reality is not known, n the Dunya nor ، فبطل بجمیع ما تقدم توهمُ خامسةٍ من كل وجه because it is a locus of bewilderment. That means ، وباﷲ التوفیق وهو الهادي بمنه إلى سواء الطریق that journeying in the Names proceeds in a certain manner, and journeying in the Attributes proceeds اللهم أرنا الحق حقا وارزقنا اتباعه وأرنا الباطل باطلا similarly, while the khalifah is merely a locus of be-wilderment. That is because if you were to journey وارزقنا اجتنابه، ولو تتبعت ما عندي من بطلانه in him through the Name and the Attribute, you . لاحتجْ ت إلى مجلدات، وهذا ما سمح به الوقت would have journeyed in him through the Name and the Attribute, not through him himself; and if you looked at him while disregarding the stages of de- السؤال السادس عشر: ما معنى قول الشیخ through the Essence, not through him. As for jour- scent, you would have journeyed in the Essence التجاني ، "رجل من الطائفة لا یُعرف في الدنیا ولا في neying in him Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.) indicated in his words—and in through him alone, forget it—as الآخرة"؟ regards to this question I do not have anything ex- الجواب : أقول أن شیئا كتمه الشیخ التجاني الأحسن last thing that the one witnessing sees, just as Shaykh cept mere indication, that’s all. Bewilderment is the كتمانه، ویفهم من كتمانه له أنه یعني صاحب Tijani (r.a.a.) says, “O Allah, increase me in bewil-derment regarding You.” Shaykh Ibrahim also indi- الكتمیة . أما كون هذا الرجل لا یعرف في الدنیا ولا cated this meaning when he said: في الآخرة فمعناه أنه لا تعرف حقیقته، لأنها محل Then where is Ibrahim and what is Ibrahim? Until they reached fana’ in him and lost themselves حیرة ، ومعنى ذلك أن السیر في الأسماء یكون على distant, and Allah knows best where Ibrahim is and Now I have said something whose meaning is وتیرة واحدة والسیر في الصفات كذلك، والخلیفة محل what Ibrahim is…The one being asked about it has حیرة فقط، لأنك إن سرت فیه من حیث الاسم والصفة like him, nor close to him, nor no more knowledge than the one asking,with him in any 7 nor is he تكون سرت فیه من حیث الاسم والصفة لا من حیث 16:8)da’irah, “It rests on Allah to show the right way” . “He creates what you know not” (Qur’an هو ، وٕإن نظرت إلیه بقطع النظر عن التنزلات تكون (Qur’an 16:9)…O Allah, “Guide us to the straight سرت في الذات من حیث هي لا من حیث هو، وأما path” (Qur’an 1:6). هو من حیث هو فلا، كما قال الشیخ التجاني رضي Question 17: Do arifs have a unique under- اﷲ عنه ولیس عندي في هذا السؤال إلا مجرد إشارة standing of Allah’s (t.) speech? فقط فنهایة ما یشاهد المشاهد الحیرة، وكما یقول Answer : Yes. Allah’s speech is an attribute of Al - الشیخ التجاني رضي اﷲ عنه، "اللهم زدني فیك lah’s (t.w.t.), it descended into every hadrah, and it has an outward and an inward: its outward is the : حیرة،" وٕإلى هذا المعنى أشار الشیخ بقوله foundation of the shari’ah, and its inward is the فأین برهام وما برهام 7 This phrase is a reference to Hadith Jibril, in which the angel Jibril (a.s.) says to the Prophet (s.a.w.s.), “Inform me about the Hour,” to which the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replies, “The one being asked about it has no more knowledge than the one asking.” Mishri (r.a.a.) may thus be making a subtle indication that there is a connection between that fourth question of Jibril (a.s.) and the matter at hand. foundation of the haqiqah. Regarding its outward, i.e. the foundation of the shari’ah, arifs have no room to play with it, since all they have in it is what has been established by the shari’ah and what scholarly consensus has arrived at. After Allah (t.) said, “Today I have perfected your deen for you, I have completed My blessing upon you, and I am pleased for you to have Islam as your deen” (Qur’an 5:3), the immaculate shari’ah was sealed—no one was to add or subtract anything from it. The utmost that each perfected wali can do in this area is to return people to it as it was at the time of Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.s.)—and that is the role of the mujaddid. What it means to be a mujaddid—i.e. the “renewer”—is not to renew the shari’ah, but to renew others’ return to the shari’ah as it is, disregarding newly invented matters, innovations, and the fanaticism that corrupt scholars have for the opinions of those they blindly imitate. This kind of mujaddid is what the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) meant when he said, “The scholars of my ummah are like the prophets of the children of Israel.” It is thus that they become the “inheritors of the prophets.” As for the inward of the Qur’an, which is the foundation of the haqiqah, constant renewal happens in regards to how its meanings become manifest. This does not mean that its meanings themselves are renewed—no, the Qur’an, its meanings, and whatever secrets, lights and effulgences it contains are all as ancient as the Attribute itself—rather, what is renewed is the manifestation of what the Qur’an has served to translate, so that we can know that this thing at hand is what was described in the Qur’an. Or, in other words, this thing has existed, and is newly understood according to the renewal of how Allah’s speech is understood. Every time there is a renewal of experiential tasting, ma’rifah, or witnessing, there is necessarily a renewal of how the Qur’an is understood as well, which occurs in accordance with the renewal of hals. Just as there is no end to the meanings of Allah’s speech, there is no end to the renewal of how the meanings of His speech are understood, and every people with a maqam understand it according to their maqam. I shall give you an example of this using His (t.) speech, “He is the First, the Last, the حتى فنوا في حبه وهاموا قلت بعید، واﷲ أعلم أین برهام وما برهام...ما المسؤول بأعلم من السائل ولا مثله ولا قریبا منه ولا معه في دِائِرة، ﴿ وََ یخْ لُقُ مَ ا لَا تَعْ لَمُ ونَ ﴾، ﴿ وَعَِ لَى ٱﷲِ قَصْ دُ ٱ َّ لس بیل ﴾...اللهم ﴿ٱهْدنَا ٱ ِّ لصراطَ ٱ لْمُ سْ ت قیمَ ﴾. السؤال السابع عشر: هل للعارفین فهم في كلام اﷲ تعالى خاص؟ الجواب : نعم كلام اﷲ صفة ﷲ تبارك وتعالى ونزل في كل حضرة وله ظاهر وباطن، فظاهره هو أصل الشریعة وباطنه هو أصل الحقیقة، أما ظاهره الذي هو أصل الشریعة فلا مجال للعارفین فیه، إذ لیس عندهم فیه إلا ما قرر الشرع وحصل علیه الإجماع، فالشریعة المطهرة بعد قوله تعالى ﴿ٱلْیَوْمَ أَكْمَ لْتُ لَكُمْ دِِینَكُمْ وَأََتْمَمْتُ عَ لَ یْكُ مْ نِعْ مَ تِي وََ رضِ یتُ لَكُ مُ ٱ لِْإسْ لَا مَ د یناً ﴾ ختمت لا یزید فیه ولا ینقص، ونهایة كل ولي كامل في هذا الباب أن یرد الناس إلیها على العهد الذي كانت علیه زمن رسول اﷲ صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم وهذا هو المجدد، لا بمعنى أنه مجدد شرعا بل مجدد للناس الرجوع إلیها من حیث هي بقطع النظر عن المحدثات والبدع وما علیه علماء السوء من التعصب لآ ارء مقلدیهم وهذا الجنس من المجددین هو المعنى بقوله صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم، "علماء أمتي كأنبیاء بني إس ارئیل،" ولهذا المعنى صاروا ورثة الأنبیاء. أما باطن القرآن الذي هو أصل الحقیقة یتجدد ظهور معانیه دائما، ولیس معنى ذلك أن معانیه هو تتجدد—لا، هو ومعانیه وما تضمن من الأس ارر Manifest, and the Hidden” (Qur’an 57:3). Those who have fana’ in the Essence see that there is nothing first, last, manifest, or hidden except the Essence itself, and they do not witness the Names. Once they have had fana’ away from their own firstness, lastness, manifestness, and hiddenness, they reach fana’ in the Essence, and when that happens, all names and named things vanish from them. The former is fana’, while the latter is fana’ away from fana’. When those who have fana’ move on to the hadrah of the Attribute, they see the ayah in front of them, and from it understand about the Attribute what they had understood about the Essence, and so on. When jadhb is complete and they travel the path of suluk, they see the ayah in front of them indicating suluk, the multiplicity of haqa’iq, the distinction of nisbahs, and dispersion. For each new maqam the saliks reach in any hadrah, they find the ayah ahead of them translating for them what they are currently experiencing, no matter how far they go; every increase in understanding of Allah is accompanied by an increase in understanding of the ayah, and neither of the two understandings has an end. Each people of a certain haqiqah have their own unique understanding of the Qur’an, which can only be understood by those who understand that haqiqah, known by those who know that haqiqah, and witnessed by those who witness that haqiqah— they receive such understanding according to their fana’ away from themselves, their baqa’ in Allah, and their knowledge of the fruits of His descent and the secret of His Names and Attributes. For every increase in perfection the heart experiences, its madad and ma’rifah widen, and that has no end. May Allah make us and all of you from the people of perfection, which has no end, for surely He is to be entrusted with such a request, and is able to fulfil it. Question 18: What is the meaning of Allah’s (t.) speech, “O Prophet, have taqwa of Allah” (Qur’an 33:1)? Answer : Allah is the one who gives us success to reach what is correct. Taqwa has three levels: والأنوار والفیوضات كل هذا قدیم بقدم الصفة وٕإنمایتجدد ظهور الشيء الذي ترجم عنه القرآن حتى نعلم أن هذا الشيء هو الذي كان موصوفا في القرآن، أو یكون الشيء كان موجودا ویتجدد الفهم فیه بحسب تجدد الفهم في كلام اﷲ، وكلما تجدد الذوق والمعرفة أو المشهد لا بد أن یتجدد فهم في القرآن بحسبما تجدد من الأحوال وكما أنه لا نهایة لمعاني كلام اﷲ فكذلك لا نهایة لما یتجدد من فهم معاني كلامه، وكل أهل مقام یفهمونه بحسب مقامهم، وأضرب لك مثلا بقوله تعالى ﴿هُوَ ٱلْأَّ ولُ وَٱلآخِرُ وَٱلظَاهِرُ وَٱلبَاطِنُ ﴾ فصاحب الفناء في الذات یرى أن لا أول ولا آخر ولا ظاهر ولا باطن إلا الذات وحدها ولا یشاهد الأسماء، فإذا فنى عن أولیته وآخریته وظاهریته وباطنیته اتصل إلى الفناء في الذات، فإذا فنى فیها تضمحل عنده جمیع الأسماء والمسمیات، وذلك الأول هو الفناء وهذا الثاني هو الفناء عن الفناء، وٕإذا انتقل الفاني إلى حضرة الصفة یرى الآیة أمامه ویفهم منها في الصفة ما كان یفهم في الذات وٕإلى هلم ج ار، وٕإذا تم جذبه وسلك طریق السلوك ی رى الآیة أمامه دالة على السلوك وتعدد الحقائق وتمییز النسب والتشتیت ولا یصل السالك إلى مقام في أي حضرة إلا ووجد الآیة أمامه مترجمة له عما هو فیه ولو بلغ ما بلغ فكلما ازداد فهما في اﷲ ازداد فهمه فیها ولا یهایة لهذا ولا لذلك، ولكل أهل حقیقة فهم في القرآن خاص بهم، لا یفهمه إلا من یفهمها ولا یعرفه إلا من یعرفها ولا یشاهده إلا من یشاهدها، ینالون ذلك الفهم بحسب فنائهم عن أنفسهم وبقائهم باﷲ ومعرفتهم لثم ارت تدلیه The taqwa of the generality of people, which is protecting oneself from sharing partners with Allah, and it is what is meant by His (t.) saying “O humankind, have taqwa of your Lord” (Qur’an 4:1, 22:1, 31:33). The taqwa of the elite, which is protecting oneself from the haram, i.e. carrying out what Allah (t.w.t.) has commanded and avoiding what He has forbidden, and it is what is meant by His (t.) saying “Have taqwa of Allah according to your ability” (Qur’an 64:16). The taqwa of the elite of the elite, which is protecting oneself from anything other than Allah ever coming to mind, and it is what is meant by His (t.) saying “Have full and complete taqwa of Allah” (Qur’an 3:102) and “Have taqwa of Me, O you who have deep hearts” (Qur’an 2:197). It is known that the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) never shared partners with Allah, that he is divinely protected from ever going against Allah’s orders, and that he is focused on Allah at all times, so the only possibility that is left for us to understand from His saying (t.w.t.) “O Prophet, have taqwa of Allah”—after addressing him by his prophethood and ordering him to have taqwa—is that this taqwa is a kind unique to the Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.) maqam and not known to anyone else. We also understand from His (t.w.t.) saying “That is part of taqwa of the heart” (Qur’an 22:32) that the kind of taqwa referred to there is the utmost extent of taqwa, which cannot be encompassed, as shown by the use of مِنْ meaning “part of.” Therefore, when He (t.) says, “Have taqwa of Me, O you who have deep hearts,” this is a command to have part of “taqwa of the heart,” while when He (t.) says, “O Prophet, have taqwa of Allah,” this is a command to have taqwa of the heart in all of its various modes, and no one can be described as having all of such taqwa except the Master of Existence (s.a.w.s.). Also know that “those who have deep hearts” are in reality the qutbs, since no one but them deserves to be described in this way. Its meaning is as follows: the madhhars are three in number: one of them corresponds to the ruh, one to the physical وسر أسمائه وصفاته، فكلما ازداد الكمال في القلباتسعت أمداده ومعارفه إلى غیر نهایة. جعلنا اﷲ وٕإیاكم من أهل الكمال الذي لا نهایة له إنه ولي ذلك والقادر علیه. السؤال الثامن عشر: عن قوله تعالى ﴿یَا أُّ َیهَا َّ ٱلنبِيٓءُ ٱتَّ قِ ٱﷲَ﴾؟ الجواب : واﷲ الموفق للصواب إن م ارتب التقوى ثلاثة: تقوى العامة وهو تقوى الشرك باﷲ وهو الم ارد بقوله تعالى ﴿یَا أُّ َیهَا َّ ٱلناسُ ٱتَّ قوا رََّ بكُم﴾ وتقوى الخاصة وهو تقوى المحرمات أي امتثال ما أمر اﷲ تبارك وتعالى به واجتناب ما نهى عنه، وهو الم راد بقوله تعالى ﴿ فَٱتَّ قوا ٱﷲَ مَا ٱسْتطعْتمْ ﴾، وتقوى خاصة الخاصة وهو تقوى خطور ما سوى اﷲ في الخاطر، وهو المِارد بقوِله تعالى ﴿ٱتَّ قوا ٱﷲَ حَ َّ ق تق اتِهِ ﴾ ﴿وَٱتَّ ق ون یَا أُُولي ٱلْألْبَ ِ اب﴾، ومعلوم أن النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم ما تقدم علیه شرك باﷲ وأنه معصوم ما خالف أمر اﷲ قط، وأنه م ارقب ﷲ في جمیع أوقِاته، فلمِ یبق إلا أن ندرك أن قوله تعالى ﴿ یَا أُّ َیها َّ ٱلنبيٓ ءُ ٱتَّ ق ٱﷲَ﴾ بعد أن خاطبه بالنبوءة وأمره بالتقوى أن هذا التقوى خاص بمقامه صلى اﷲ علیه وِسلم لا یعلمه غیره، ونفهم من قوله تبارك وتعالى ﴿ف إَّ نهَا ِمنْ تقْوى ٱلْقُل ِ وب﴾ أنه هو نهایة التقوى وأنه لا یحاط به بدلیل من التبعیضیة، فقوله تعالى ﴿وَٱتَّ ق ونِ یَا أُُوِلِي ٱلْألْبَ اب﴾ هِذا أمر بِبعض تقوى القلوب، وقوله تعالى ﴿یَا أُّ َیها َّ ٱلنبيٓءُ ٱتَّ ق ٱﷲَ ﴾ هذا أمر بجمیع أنواع م ارتب تقوى القلوب الذي لا یمكن أن یتصف بجمیع form, and one to the heart about in detail above. Every madhhar has an out- —this has been spoken أنواعه إلا سید الوجود صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم واعلم أن ward, an inward, and an inward of the inward, which أولي الألباب حقیقة هم الأقطاب، إذ لا یستحق أن even and an odd: the even in every hadrah is what makes nine levels total. Then every hadrah has an یوصف بهذا الوصف غیرهم ومعناه أن المظاهر ثلاثة meetswhile the odd in every hadrah is what meets the deep the ruh and what meets the physical form, منها ما یناسب الروح، ومنها ما یناسب الشبح، ومنها heart, and the only one to ever reach it is the one ما یناسب القلب، وقد تقدم الكلام علیها مفصلا، ولكل them in regards to how they themselves appear out-who has gone past the two before it, i.e. gone past مظهر ظاهر وباطن وباطن باطن فصارت المنازل wardly, and gone past them in regards to the deeper تسعة ، فكل حضرة لها شفع ووتر، والشفع في كل outward appearance, he or she gains a deep heart in meaning—so in going past them in regards to the حضرة ما یقابل الروح وما یقابل الشبح والوتر في كل the outer appearance of the matter, while in going past them in regards to the deeper meaning, he or حضرة ما یقابل اللب، ولن یصل إلیها إلا من تجاوز she gains the experience of “and no one takes heed اللتین قبلها مطلقا أي تجاوزها من حیث نفسه 3:7).except those who have deep hearts” (Qur’an 2:269, وتجاوزها من حیث قدسه فیكون بتجاوزها في نفسه لبا “Have taqwa of Me, O you who have deep hearts” So there is a relationship between His (t.) saying في نفسه ویكون بتجاوزها لها في قدسِه وما یذكر إلا and “O Prophet, have taqwa of Allah,” which is that أولوا اِلألباب، فإن قوله تعالىِ ﴿وَٱتَّ ق ون یَا أُولي both of them fall under the category of “the heart.” However, the starting point of true taqwa taqwa of ٱلْأَ لْبَ اب﴾ وقوله ﴿یَا أَُّ َیها َّ ٱلنبيٓءُ ٱتَّ ق ٱﷲَ ﴾ بینهما of Allah is the qutbs’ endpoint, and the qutbs’ end-point is the maqam of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.). May مناسبة وهي كون الجمیع داخلا في نطاق تقوى Allah make us and all of you from among those who القلوب ، إلا أن بدایة تقوى اﷲ من حیث هو هي نهایة the Akhirah. believe in him and gather with him in the Dunya and ، الأقطاب ونهایته هي مقامه علیه الصلاة والسلام جعلنا اﷲ وٕإیاكم ممن آمن به واجتمع معه في الدنیا Question 19: For the people of haqiqah, . والآخرة what is subtly indicated by His speech, “by Asr” (Qur’an 103:1)? Answer : Shaykh Ibrahim has spoken about this : السؤال التاسع عِشر: ما الإشارة لقوله تعالى ayah, and one of the things he has said about it is that “by Asr”—which could be understood as “by وَٱلْعَصْ ر﴾ عند أهل الحقیقة؟ ﴿ time”—is an oath taken on the life of the Prophet الجواب : الآیة تكلم الشیخ فیها، ومما قال فیها أن (For the people of haqiqah, the meaning of both pos-s.a.w.s.), i.e. his time, or an oath taken on all of time. والعصر قسم بحیاة النبي صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم أي sibilities is the same, because for them all of time is عصره ، أو إنه قسم بالدهر، وهذا وذلك بمعنى واحد of all the worlds. The fact that the Truth (majestic just one part of his (s.a.w.s.) life, since he is the fruit عند أهل الحقیقة، لأن الدهر عندهم بعض من حیاته and exalted be He) has sworn an oath on the life of علیه السلام، إذ هو الثمرة من جمیع العوالم، وكون the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) indicates that, according to Allah, he has the highest rank of all creation. Another thing that Shaykh Ibrahim has said is: “Know that when someone of high status says something, even without taking an oath upon it, it must be true, and so especially if that person of high status is Allah (t.w.t.), and if He has taken an oath upon what He said.” Allah has sworn that there is no safety from losing except by four things: Iman in Allah, doing righteous actions, exhorting each other to Truth, and exhorting each other to patience. So it is impossible for anyone who does not cling to these four matters to find safety, as Allah (t.w.t.) has said. I have also said that this ayah has something special for this ummah of ours: just as the daytime clearly consists of three parts—or, in other words, three distinct times—the ummah consists of three parts. This is the number of madhhars, and every madhhar corresponds to a time: the morning is Muhammadiyyah, for Muhammadiyyah is the dawn of Islam; noontime is Sealhood, for that is the noontime of Islam; and the same with Asr. Even if Asr can mean “time” in general and therefore be used to refer to the whole, it is also specific to the last part of the day. The blessed ayah also has another subtle indication, in that it proceeds along four segments: first “those who believe,” second “do righteous actions,” third “exhort each other to Truth,” and fourth “exhort each other to patience”—so correspondence occurs between Asr, which is the last part of the day, and patience, which is the last of these stages. May Allah make us and all of you amongst those who believe, do righteous actions, exhort each other to Truth, and exhort each other to patience. Question 20: What is the wisdom behind the extraction of mineral wealth and the many peculiar kinds of engineering? Answer : I say that it is a sign of the Hour approaching, as is to be found in His (t.) speech: “When the earth is entirely shaken with her quaking, and the earth expels her burdens” (Qur’an 99:1-2) and “Until when the earth puts on her decorations and adorns herself, and her people think that they have power over it, then Our command will come upon her…” (Qur’an 10:24). It should be clear that the الحق جل وعلا أقسم بحیاته صلى اﷲ علیه وسلم فیه دلیل على أنه هو أعلى الخلق مرتبة عند اﷲ، ومن كلام الشیخ: "اعلموا أن الكبیر إذا قال شیئا ولو لم یقسم علیه لا بد أن یكون حقا، لا سیما إذا كان الكبیر هو اﷲ تبارك وتعالى وكان قد أقسم على ما قال"، واﷲ أقسم بأن لا نجاة من الخس ارن إلا بأربعة: الإیمان باﷲ والعمل بالأعمال الصالحة، والتوصي بالحق، والتواصي بالصبر، فمن لم یستمسك بهذه الأمور الأربعة فنجاته مستحیلة كما قال اﷲ تبارك وتعالى. قلت وفي هذه الآیة خصوصیة لآخر هذه الأمة، كما لا یخفى من كون النهار ثلاثة أج ازء—وبعبارة أخرى ثلاثة أوقات—والأمة ثلاثة أج ازء عدد المظاهر، وكل مظهر یقابله وقت، فالصبح هو المحمدیة، فهي فجر الإسلام، والظهر هو الختمیة، فهو ظهر الإسلام، والعصر كذلك، وٕإن كان العصر یطلق على الكل، فإنه خاص أیضا بآخر النهار، وفي الآیة الكریمة إشارة أخرى حیث أنها جاءت على أربعة أقسام: القسم الأول الذین آمنوا، القسم الثاني عملوا الصالحات، الثالث تواصوا بالحق، ال اربع توصوا بالصبر، فحصلت المناسبة بین العصر الذي هو آخر النهار والصبر الذي هو آخر الم ارتب، جعلنا اﷲ وٕإیاكم من الذین آمنوا وعملوا الصالحات وتواصوا بالحق وتواصوا بالصبر. السؤال العش رون: ما الحكمة في استخارج الكنوز وكثرة أنواع غریب الهندسة؟ الجواب : أقول إنه دلیل على قرب الساعة، كما في closer the Hour gets, the more its glimmers appear—just like when the rain approaches, indications of it appear, or when the night approaches, the light of day begins to disappear bit by bit and the darkness increases bit by bit, as is the case with the approach of the day. Therefore, if you take a look, you will see that for everything there is a glimmer of its beginning in the end of whatever comes before it. The wisdom behind all of this is “so that those who have Iman will be increased in their Iman…” (Qur’an 74:31): it increases the people of Allah in their desire and hope in Him, and in their fear and humility before Him, since every time a sign appears, it increases their certainty in the Akhirah and their renunciation of the Dunya, because of how it indicates the approach of the Akhirah and the retreat of the Dunya, lest they find solace in a Dunya that retreats day after day rather than an Akhirah that approaches day after day. The Akhirah appears to them in the form of the Dunya in order for them to find solace in the Akhirah and to see their current level of Iman increase even more, while the people of the Dunya increase in their Iman in their Dunya and thereby desire it more. Just as the Dunya at its foundations is a painful punishment for one group and forgiveness and satisfaction from Allah for another, similarly Allah made this age of ours—with the progress of the state of the Dunya, its flourishing, its luxury, and its beautiful scenery—in order for the people of evil to increase in evil and for the people of good to increase in good. From another perspective, just as the earth of haqiqah has expelled its burdens, so the physical form of the earth must manifest its hidden elements. We ask Allah (t.w.t.) to grant us solace and keep us busy with His hidden elements away from anything other than Him. “And the last of their supplication will be, ‘al-Hamdu Lillah, Rabbil-Alamin’ ” (Qur’an 10:10). قوله تعالى: ﴿إذَ ا زُْ ل زَِ لتِ ٱ لْأ رْضُ زِْ ل زََال هَ ا وََ أخْ رَجَ تِ ٱ لْأَ رْضُِ أ ثْ قَ الَ هَا...﴾ وكما في قوله تعالى: ﴿حَ ت َّ ىٰ إِ ذَا أخَ ذَ ت ٱ لْأَ رْضُ زُخْ رَُ فهَ ا وَٱَّ زَّ ی نَتْ وَ ظََّ ن أَ هْ لُهَ ا أَّ نهُ مْ قَادِ رُونَ عَ لَیْ هَا...الآیة﴾ ولا یخفى علیك أن الساعة كلما قربت لاحت بوارقها، كما أن المطر إذا قرب تظهر علاماته واللیل إذا قرب ینتقص ضوء النهار شیئا فشیئا ویزداد الظلام شیئا فشیئا وكذلك النهار وٕإذا نظرت في جمیع الأشیاء ترى بدایة كل شيء تلوح في نهایة الأمر الذي قبله والحكمة فیه ِل﴿ یَ زَْد ادَ ٱل َّ ذِ ینَ آمَ نُوا إِیمَ اناً ...الآیة﴾، فأهل اﷲ یزیدهم هذا رغبة ورجاء فیه وخوفا وخشیة منه، فكلما ظهرت علامة ازدتهم یقینا في الآخرة وزهدا في الدنیا لدلالتها على إقبال الآخرة وٕإدبار الدنیا حتى لا یتأنسوا بدنیا مدبرة یوما بعد یوم عن آخرة مقبلة یوما بعد یوم، فتت راءى لهم الآخرة في صورة الدنیا لیتأنسوا بها ولیزدادوا إیمانا مع إیمانهم، ولیزداد أهل الدنیا إیمانا بدنیاهم ویرغبوا فیها بها، فكما أن الدنیا من أصلها عذاب ألیم لطائفة ومغفرة ورضوان من اﷲ لطائفة أخرى، فكذلك الی وم هذا من ترقي أحوال الدنیا وازدهارها ورفاهیتها وحسن مناظرها جعله اﷲ لیزداد به أهل الشر في الشر وأهل الخیر في الخیر، ومن وجه آخر فكما أن أرض الحقیقة أخرجت أثقالها فكذلك أرض الصورة، لا بد أن تظهر كتمیاتها، ونسأل اﷲ تبارك وتعالى أن یؤنسنا ویشغلنا بكتمیاته عما سواه، وآخر دعواهم أن الحمد ﷲ رب العالمین. i The original title of the work is literally “Hand Grenades in Defense of the Spiritual Path of the Sufis,” by which Mishri (r.a.) is alluding to the force and power of his words. Although it would be evidently clear to anyone who gives a cursory glance throughout the work that the material under discussion pertains to deeply spiritual matters and has absolutely nothing to do with violence, we are indeed living in a political context that involves a widespread, misguided association between Islam and violence, and hence the first two words have been left out of the translated title on the front page.