[2:203]
And remember God, by making takbīr [saying Allāhu akbar, ‘God is Great’] while you cast your stones at the
Jamarāt, during certain days numbered, the three days of tashrīq. If any man hastens on, his departure
from Minā, in two days, that is, on the second day of tashrīq after he has cast his stones, that, hastening, is
no sin for him; and if he delays, such that he stays until the third night and cast his stones, it is not a sin for
him: that is, they have the choice of either, for the sin has been precluded in both cases; if he fears, God
during his pilgrimage — for such [a person] is truly a pilgrim — and fear God, and know that to Him you
shall be gathered, in the Hereafter, that He may requite you for your deeds.
[2:204]
And among people there is he whose speech in the life of this world pleases you, but it would not please you
in the Hereafter because it contradicts what he actually used to believe; and who calls on God to witness
what is in his heart, as being in accordance with what he says; yet he is most stubborn in dispute, with you
and your followers on account of his enmity towards you: this was al-Akhnas b. Sharīq, a hypocrite who
spoke kindly in the presence of the Prophet (s), swearing that he believed in him and that he loved him, and
frequently sitting with him. God then revealed his mendacity in this matter. On one occasion he passed by
some crops and livestock that belonged to the Muslims and later that night he set fire to them [the crops]
and slaughtered them [the livestock]. God, moreover, says:
[2:205]
And when he turns his back, leaving you behind, he hastens, he walks, about the earth to do corruption
there and to destroy the tillage and the stock (these [last two actions] are included in such ‘corruption’); and
God loves not corruption, that is to say, it does not please Him.
[2:206]
And when it is said to him, ‘Fear God’, in your actions, he is seized by vainglory, pride and rage, in his sin,
the one he was commanded to avoid committing. So Hell shall be enough, [it] suffices, for him — how evil a
cradling, a resting place it is!
[2:207]
But there are other men who sell themselves, expend themselves in obedience to God, desiring God’s
pleasure: this was Suhayb [b. Sinān al-Rūmī], who emigrated to Medina when the idolaters began to
persecute him, leaving them all his property; and God is Gentle with His servants, for He guides them to
what pleases Him.
[2:208]
The following verse was revealed regarding ‘Abd Allāh b. Salām and his companions, who after converting to
Islam still observed the Sabbath with reverence and were averse to [the consumption of] camels: O you who
believe, come, all of you, into submission (read al-salm or al-silm), that is, Islam; kāffatan is a circumstantial
qualifier referring to al-silm, meaning, into all of its precepts; and follow not the steps, the ways, of Satan,
that is, his temptations to you by way of creating divisions; he is a manifest foe to you, one whose enmity is
obvious.
[2:209]
But if you slip, and incline away from implementing all of its precepts, after the clear proofs, the lucid
arguments, have come to you, to the effect that this is the truth, know then that God is Mighty, and nothing
can prevent Him from taking His vengeance against you; Wise, in His actions.

37

[2:210]
What do they, those that fail to enter into it [sc. Islam] completely, wait for, await, that God shall come to
them, that is, His Command; this is similar to where God says, or that God’s command should come to pass
[Q. 16:33], meaning His chastisement, in the shadows (zulal, plural of zulla) of clouds, and the angels? The
matter is determined, the matter of their destruction has been completed, and to God all matters are
returned, in the Hereafter, where He will requite each according to his deeds (read passive [turja‘u al-umūr,
‘matters are returned’] or active [tarji‘u al-umūr, ‘matters return’]).
[2:211]
Ask, O Muhammad (s), the Children of Israel, by way of rebuke, how many a clear proof, manifest ones
such as the parting of the sea, and the sending down of manna and quails, which they exchanged for
unbelief, did We give them (kam, ‘how many’, is the interrogative particle linking the second object of the
verb sal, ‘ask’, and is also the second object of the verb ātaynā, ‘We gave’, and its specifier); whoever
changes God’s grace, that is, what God has blessed him with in the way of signs, for these constitute the
causes of guidance, after it has come to him, out of unbelief, God is severe in retribution against him.
[2:212]
Decked out fair to the disbelievers, of Mecca, is the life of this world, in disguise and they have fallen in love
with it; and they deride the believers, on account of their poverty, the likes of Bilāl [al-Habashī], ‘Ammār [b.
Yāsir], and Suhayb [al-Rūmī], mocking them and treating them condescendingly with their wealth; but those
who fear, idolatry, namely, those mentioned, shall be above them on the Day of Resurrection; and God
sustains whomever He will without reckoning, with ample sustenance in the Hereafter or in this world, when
He gives to those that were mocked possession of the property and lives of those that mocked them.
[2:213]
People were one community, in faith, but they fell into disagreement, and some believed, while others
disbelieved; then God sent forth the prophets, to them, as bearers of good tidings, of Paradise for the
believers, and warners, of the Fire for the disbelievers; and He revealed with them the Scripture, meaning,
the Books, with the truth (bi’l-haqqi, ‘with the truth’, is semantically connected to anzala, ‘He revealed’) that
He might decide, according to it, between people regarding their differences, in religion; and only those who
had been given it, the Scripture, so that some believed while others disbelieved, differed about it, [about]
religion, after the clear proofs, the manifest arguments for God’s Oneness, had come to them (min [of min
ba‘di, ‘after’] is semantically connected to ikhtalafa, ‘they differed’, and together with what follows should be
understood as coming before the exception [illā lladhīna, ‘only those’]); out of insolence, on the part of the
disbelievers, one to another; then God guided those who believed to the truth, regarding which (min [of min
al-haqqi, ‘of the truth’] here is explicative) they were at variance, by His leave, by His will; and God guides,
with His guidance, whomever He will to a straight path, the path of truth.
[2:214]
The following was revealed after the Muslims suffered a trying experience: Or did you suppose that you
should enter Paradise without there having come upon you the like of, what came upon, those, believers,
who passed away before you?, of trials, so that you may endure as they did; a new sentence begins here,
explaining the previous one: They were afflicted by misery, extreme poverty, and hardship, illness, and were
so convulsed, by all types of tribulations, that the Messenger and those who believed with him said (read
yaqūla or yaqūlu), not expecting to see any help, on account of the extreme hardship afflicting them, ‘When
will God’s help come?’, [the help] which we were promised; and God responded to them: Ah, but surely
God’s help is nigh, in coming.
[2:215]
They will ask you, O Muhammad (s), about what they should expend. This was the question posed by ‘Amr
38

b. al-Jamūh. He was a wealthy elderly man and went to ask the Prophet (s) what and for whom he should
expend; Say, to them: ‘Whatever you expend of good (min khayrin, ‘of good’, is an explication of mā,
‘whatever’, covering small and large amounts, and denotes one half of the question represented by the
expender; God responds with regard to the one receiving the expenditure, this pertaining to the other half of
the question, in the following) it is for parents and kinsmen, orphans, the needy, and the traveller, that is,
they are the most deserving of it; and whatever good you may do, by way of expending or otherwise, God
has knowledge of it’, and will requite it accordingly.
[2:216]
Prescribed for you, obligatory [for you], is fighting, disbelievers, though it be hateful to you, by nature,
because of the hardship involved. Yet it may happen that you hate a thing which is good for you; and it may
happen that you love a thing which is bad for you: because the soul inclines towards those desires which
result in its destruction and its rejection of the religious obligations that would bring about its happiness.
Perhaps, then, even if you are averse to it, you will find much good in fighting, as a result of victory, booty,
martyrdom or reward; while, if you were to reject fighting, even if you would like to do so, you will find
much evil, because then you may be subjugated, impoverished and denied the reward; God knows, what is
good for you, and you know, this, not, so strive in what He commands you.
[2:217]
Thus the Prophet (s) sent forth the first of his raiding parties under the command of ‘Abd Allāh b. Jahsh.
They fought against the idolaters and killed [‘Amr b. ‘Abd Allāh] Ibn al-Hadramī in [the sacred month of]
Rajab, thinking that it was the last day of Jumādā II. The disbelievers reviled them for making fighting lawful
in a sacred month, and so God revealed the following: They ask you about the sacred, the forbidden, month,
and fighting in it (qitālin fīhi, ‘fighting in it’, is an inclusive substitution [for al-shahri l-harāmi, ‘the sacred
month’]). Say, to them: ‘Fighting (qitālun is the subject) in it is a grave thing (kabīr, ‘grave’, is the
predicate), that is, heinous in terms of sin; but to bar (saddun is the subject), people, from God’s way, His
religion, and disbelief in Him, in God, and, to bar from, the Sacred Mosque, that is, Mecca, and to expel its
people, the Prophet (s) and the believers, from it — that is graver (the predicate of the [last] subject), [that
is] more heinous in terms of sin than fighting in it, in God’s sight; and sedition, your idolatry, is graver than,
your, slaying’, in it. They, the disbelievers, will not cease to fight against you, O believers, until, so that, they
turn you from your religion, to unbelief, if they are able; and whoever of you turns from his religion, and
dies disbelieving — their, good, works have failed, that is, they are invalid, in this world and the Hereafter.
Thus they will not count for anything and will not result in any reward. The specification of death as a
condition is because if that person were to return to Islam [again], his original deeds would not be
invalidated, and he will be rewarded for them, and he would not have to repeat them, [deeds] such as
[performing] the Pilgrimage: al-Shāfi‘ī is of this opinion. Those are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding
therein.
[2:218]
When those of the raiding party [of ‘Abd Allāh b. Jahsh] thought that, although they had been released from
the sin [of having slain in the sacred month], they would not receive any reward, the following was
revealed: Verily the believers, and those who emigrate, and depart from their homeland, and struggle in
God’s way, in order to elevate His religion — those have hope of God’s compassion, His reward; and God is
Forgiving, of believers, Merciful, to them.
[2:219]
They ask you about wine, and divinatory arrows, gambling, and what the ruling is regarding them. Say, to
them: ‘In both, that is, in the partaking of both, is great sin (a variant reading [for kabīr, ‘great’] has kathīr,
‘much’) because of the fighting, cursing and swearing that ensue from it; and profit for men, by way of
delight and enjoyment in wine, and acquiring money effortlessly from gambling; but the sin in them, that is,
the degenerate behaviour in which they result, is greater, graver, than the usefulness’. When this verse was
revealed, some gave up drinking, while others persisted, until the verse of sūrat al-Mā’ida [Q. 5:90-91]
39

finally made it illicit. And they will ask you what, that is to say, how much, they should expend. Say, expend,
‘Comfortably’ (al-‘afwa [in the accusative] is also read in the nominative, al-‘afwu, implying a preceding
huwa), that is, the surplus of your need, and do not expend what you need, ruining yourselves. So, just as
He explained to you what has been mentioned, God makes clear His signs to you that you might reflect,
[2:220]
on, the matters of, this world and the Hereafter, and follow what is best for you in both. They will ask you
about orphans, and the distress their affair caused them, for, if they became intimate with them, they may
slip into error, but if they put aside the money due to them and prepare their meals for them separately, this
would distress them. Say: ‘To set their affairs aright, in terms of their funds, by looking after it, and your
mingling with them, is better’, than you not doing this; and if you intermix with them, your funds and theirs,
they are your brothers, in religion and it is only natural for one to intermix his affair with his brother, so you
do too; God knows well him who works corruption, in their property when he intermixes with them, from
him who sets, it, aright, and God will requite both; and had He willed He would have harassed you, and
made it difficult for you by prohibiting you from intermixing with them. Surely God is Mighty, victorious in His
affair, Wise, in His actions.
[2:221]
O Muslims, Do not marry idolatresses, disbelievers, until they believe; a believing slavegirl is better than an
idolatress, who may be a free woman; this was revealed as a rebuttal of the idea that it was shameful to
marry a slavegirl and that it was better to marry an idolatress free woman; though you may admire her,
because of her beauty and wealth: this provision excludes the womenfolk of the People of the Scripture (as
indicated by the verse [Q. 5:5], [lawful to you] are the chaste women among those who were given the
Scripture). And do not marry, off believing women to, idolaters, until they believe. A believing slave is better
than an idolater, though you may admire him, for his wealth and good looks. Those, the people of idolatry,
call to the Fire, because they invite one to perform deeds that merit this, and for this reason one should not
marry with them; and God calls, through the voice of His prophets, to Paradise and pardon, that is, to the
deeds that merit these two, by His leave, by His will, so that His call may be heeded by marrying with His
friends; and He makes clear His signs to the people so that they might remember, [that] they [might] be
admonished.
[2:222]
They will ask you about the monthly period, that is, menstruation and the spot in which it occurs, and how
should one treat women during it. Say: ‘It is an ailment, filth, or the place whence it issues is so; so part
with women, refrain from sexual intercourse with them, in the monthly period, in this time, or in the part
affected; and do not approach them, for sexual intercourse, until they are pure (yathurna, or yattahharna:
the original tā’ [of yatatahharna] has been assimilated with the tā’), that is, until they have cleansed
themselves after its cessation; when they have cleansed themselves, then come to them, in sexual
intercourse, as God has commanded you’, by avoiding it, the female organ, during menstruation and not
resorting to any other part. Truly, God loves, that is, He rewards and honours, those who repent, of sins,
and He loves those who cleanse themselves, from impurities.
[2:223]
Your women are a tillage for you, that is, the place where you sow [the seeds of] your children; so come to
your tillage, that is, the specified place, the front part, as, in whichever way, you wish, whether standing up,
sitting down, lying down, from the front or the back: this was revealed in response to the Jews saying that if
a person had vaginal intercourse with his wife from behind, the child would be born cross-eyed; and offer
for your souls, righteous deeds, such as saying, ‘In the Name of God’ (bismillāh) when you commence
intercourse; and fear God, in what He commands and prohibits; and know that you shall meet Him, at the
Resurrection, where He will requite you according to your deeds; and give good tidings, of Paradise, to the
believers, who feared Him.

40

[2:224]
Do not make God, by swearing in His Name, a hindrance, a cause of impediment, in your oaths, that is,
setting up [such impediments] by swearing in His Name frequently, so as not, to be pious and God-fearing;
in such instances oaths are hateful, and result in perjury, which requires a redemption, effected by doing the
opposite [of the oath], such as performing righteous deeds and so forth, which constitute an act of
obedience; and to put things right between people: this means, do not be prevented from doing righteous
deeds, as mentioned, just because you swore against them; nay, do them and make redemption; [this
understanding of the verse is] justified by the reason for its revelation, namely, their refraining from such
deeds; surely God is All-Hearing, of what you say, Knower, of your circumstances.
[2:225]
God will not take you to task for a slip, that results, in your oaths, which is what the tongue utters
spontaneously and unintentionally, such as ‘By God’, ‘Indeed, by God’: in such instances there is no sin and
no redemption required; but He will take you to task for what your hearts have earned, what their intention
is, when you commit perjury in your oaths; and God is Forgiving, of slips [in your oaths], Forbearing, since
He delays the punishment of the one deserving it.
[2:226]
For those who forswear their women, by swearing that they will not have sexual intercourse with them, a
wait of four months; if they revert, back from the oath, or repeal it and resume sexual relations, God is
Forgiving, of the harm they caused their women by swearing, Merciful, to them.
[2:227]
But if they resolve upon divorce, by not repealing it, then let them go through with it; surely God is Hearing,
of what they say; Knowing, of their resolve, meaning that after the waiting period mentioned, they can only
revert or divorce.
[2:228]
Divorced women shall wait by themselves, before remarrying, for three periods (qurū’in is the plural of qar’),
of purity or menstruation — these are two different opinions — which begin from the moment of divorce.
This [stipulation] applies to those who have been sexually penetrated but not to those otherwise, on account
of His saying, there shall be no [waiting] period for you to reckon against them [Q. 33:49]. The waiting
period for immature or menopausal women is three months; pregnant women, on the other hand, must wait
until they give birth, as stated in the sūrat al-Talāq [Q. 65:4], while slavegirls must wait two months,
according to the Sunna. And it is not lawful for them to hide what God has created in their wombs, of child
or menstruation, if they believe in God and the Last Day. Their mates, their spouses, have a better right to
restore them, to bring them back, even if they refuse, in such time, that is, during the waiting period, if they
desire to set things right, between them, and put pressure on the woman [to return]; the statement is not a
condition for the possibility of return, but an incitement [to set things right] in the case of repealed divorce;
the term ahaqq, ‘better right to’, does not denote any priority, since, in any case, no other person has the
right to marry them during their waiting period; women shall have rights, due from their spouses, similar to
those, rights, due from them, with justice, as stipulated by the Law, in the way of kind conjugality and not
being harmed; but their men have a degree above them, in rights, as in their duty to obey their husbands,
because of their [the husbands’] payment of a dowry and their [husbands] being the bread-winners; God is
Mighty, in His Kingdom, Wise, in what He has ordained for His creatures.
[2:229]
Divorce, that is, repudiation of the type that may be revoked, is twice; then honourable retention, that is to
say, you are then obliged to revert to them to retain them, without harming them; or setting, them, free
kindly. It is not lawful for you, O male spouses, to take of what you have given them, of dowry, if you
41

divorce them, unless the, married, couple fear that they may not maintain God’s bounds, that is to say, that
they will not honour the rights God has established for them (a variant reading [for yakhāfā, ‘they (dual
form) fear’] has yukhāfā, with the direct object taking the accusative ending; allā yuqīmā is an inclusive
substitution for the person [governing the verb]; both verbs are also read in the second person [sc. takhāfā,
‘you fear’, tuqīmā, ‘you maintain’]). If you fear they may not maintain God’s bounds, neither of them would
be at fault if she were to ransom herself, of some money, so that he should divorce her. In other words, in
this instance, there is no culpability either for the man, should he take of the dowry, or for the woman,
should she offer of it. Those, prescriptions mentioned, are God’s bounds; do not transgress them. Whoever
transgresses God’s bounds — those are the evildoers.
[2:230]
If he, the husband, divorces her, after the two utterances [of divorce]; she shall not be lawful to him after
that, after the third [utterance of] divorce, until she marries another husband, who has sexual intercourse
with her, as reported by the two Shaykhs [Bukhārī and Muslim]. If he, the second husband, divorces her,
then neither of them would be at fault, that is, the woman and her first husband, to return to each other, in
wedlock, after the completion of the waiting period, if they think that they will maintain God’s bounds.
Those, matters mentioned, are God’s bounds, which He makes clear to a people who have knowledge, [a
people who] reflect.
[2:231]
When you divorce women, and they have, very nearly, reached, the end of, their term, then retain them, by
returning to them, honourably, not harming them, or set them free honourably, or leave them until their
term is completed; do not retain them, when reverting, in harm (dirāran is an object denoting reason), to
transgress, that is, so as to force them to redemption, or to repudiate them or confine them indoors for a
long time; whoever does that has wronged his soul, by exposing it to God’s chastisement; take not God’s
verses in mockery, in jest by contravening them, and remember God’s grace upon you, that is, Islam, and
the Book, the Qur’ān, and the wisdom, the rulings contained therein, He has revealed to you, to exhort you
therewith, so that you should give thanks by acting in accordance with it; and fear God, and know that God
has knowledge of all things, and nothing can be hidden from Him.
[2:232]
When you divorce women, and they have reached, completed, their term, of waiting, do not debar them —
addressing the guardians here — from marrying their, divorced, husbands when they, the male spouses and
their women, have agreed together honourably, in accordance with the Law. The occasion for the revelation
[of this verse] was: Ma‘qil b. Yasār’s sister was divorced by her husband, who then wanted to restore her,
but Ma‘qil refused, as reported by al-Hākim. That, the prohibition against debarring, is an admonition for
whoever of you believe in God and the Last Day, because it is for the benefit of such a person; that,
refraining from debarring, is purer for you, better, and cleaner, for you and for them, bearing in mind the
suspicion that can be aroused by the couple on account of prior intimacy. God knows, what is in your
interest, and you know not, any of this, so follow His commands.
[2:233]
Mothers, shall, suckle their children for two full years (kāmilayn, ‘two full ones’, is an adjective for
emphasis); this is, for such as desire to fulfil the suckling, and this is the maximum length of time. It is for
the father to provide, food for, them, the mothers, and clothe them, during the suckling if they be divorced,
honourably, to the best of his ability. No soul is charged save to its capacity, its ability; a mother shall not be
harmed by her child, that is, on account of the child, by being forced to suckle it, if she does not want to;
neither, should, a father, be harmed, by his child, that is, on account of it, by being charged with more than
he is able to bear. The mention of both parents here in relation to the child is intended to show sympathy
[for both]. The heir, the one inheriting from his father, that is, the young man who is the trustee of his
[father’s] property, has a similar duty, to that of the father in terms of providing sustenance and clothing for
the [other] parent. But if the two, parents, desire by mutual consent, agreement, and consultation, so that
42

the child’s best interests are clear, to wean, that is, to effect ablactation before the completion of the twoyear period, then they would not be at fault, in this matter. And if you (addressing the parents) desire to
seek nursing, from other than the mothers, for your children, you would not be at fault, in this respect,
provided you hand over, to them, what you have given, what you intend to give them in the way of wages,
honourably, in kindness and good nature; and fear God, and know that God sees what you do, and that
nothing of it can be hidden from Him.
[2:234]
And those of you who pass away, die, leaving, behind, wives, they shall wait by themselves, after their
death, refraining from marriage, for four months and ten, nights: this applies to women who are not
pregnant. The waiting period in the case of pregnant women is for them to give birth — as stated by a verse
in sūrat al-Talāq [Q. 65:4]. The slavegirl must wait for half this period [of four months] according to the
Sunna; when they have reached, completed, their term, of waiting, then you would not be at fault, O
guardians, regarding what they may do with themselves, in the way of adorning themselves and offering
themselves before suitors, honourably, in accordance with the Law; God is aware of what you do, both
secretly and openly.
[2:235]
You would not be at fault regarding the proposal, with the intention of marriage, you present, offer, or hide
in your hearts, during the waiting period, to women, whose spouses have died: such as men saying, ‘How
beautiful you are!’, or, ‘Who could find one like you?’, or ‘How many a man must desire you!’. God knows
that you will be mindful of them, in proposing to them impatiently, and so He has permitted you to make
such offers; but do not make arrangements, of marriage, with them secretly, unless you speak honourable
words, such as are acknowledged by the Law, in other words, such as proposals, that which is permitted to
you. And do not resolve on the knot, the consummation, of marriage until that which is written, the period
prescribed, has reached its term, and has been completed; and know that God knows what is in your souls,
of resolve or otherwise; so be fearful of Him, that He should chastise you if you have made such resolve;
and know that God is Forgiving, toward him who is fearful of Him, Forbearing, in delaying the chastisement
of the one deserving it.
[2:236]
You would not be at fault if you divorce women while you have not touched them (tamassūhunna: also read
tumāssūhunna), that is, [while] you have not had sexual intercourse with them, nor appointed any
obligation, dowry, for them (the particle mā, ‘while’, relates to the verbal action and is also adverbial) that is
to say, there are no sinful consequences for divorcing them if you have not copulated with them or assigned
them a dowry, so divorce them; yet make provision of comforts for them honourably, that is, in accordance
with the Law (bi’l-ma‘rūf, ‘honourably’, is an adjectival qualification of matā‘an, ‘comforts’), giving them what
they can enjoy, the one of ample means, the affluent among you, according to his means, and the needy
man, of restricted income, according to his means — an obligation (haqqan, ‘obligation’, is either a second
qualifier of matā‘an, ‘comforts’, or an emphatic verbal noun), on the virtuous, the obedient ones.
[2:237]
And if you divorce them before you have touched them, and you have already appointed for them an
obligation, then one-half of what you have appointed, must be given to them and the other half returns to
you; unless it be that they, the women, make remission, and forgo it, or he makes remission, by leaving her
the entire amount, the one in whose hand is the knot of marriage, the husband to be, or as Ibn ‘Abbās is
reported to have said, ‘The legal guardian, where the female is a minor’; in which case nobody would be at
fault; yet that you should remit (wa-an ta‘fū is the subject) is nearer to piety (aqrabu li’l-taqwā is its
predicate). Forget not kindness between you, that is, to be bountiful towards one another; surely God sees
what you do, and will requite you accordingly.
[2:238]
43

Maintain the, five, prayers, by performing them at their appointed times, and the middle prayer, either that
of the afternoon, or the morning, or the midday, or another prayer (there are many opinions on this
matter); God has singled it out for mention because of its merit; and stand, in prayer, submissive to God, li
Lllāhi qānitīn: some have said that this means ‘obedience’, on account of the Prophet (s) saying, ‘Wherever
the [expression] qunūt [‘submission’], appears in the Qur’ān, it denotes obedience’, as reported by Ahmad
[b. Hanbal] and others; it is also said to mean ‘in silence’ [sākitīn], on the basis of a hadīth of Zayd b.
Arqam, in which he said, ‘We used to speak to each other sometimes during prayer, but when this was
revealed, we were commanded to be silent and were forbidden to talk’, as reported by the two Shaykhs
[Bukhārī and Muslim].
[2:239]
And if you are in fear, of an enemy, or a torrent, or a predatory animal, then standing (rijāl, plural of rājil),
praying while walking, or mounted (rukbān, plural of rākib). In other words, in whichever way you can,
facing the direction of the qibla or otherwise, making the gestures of genuflexion and prostration; but when
you are secure, from any fear, then remember God, by performing prayer, as He taught you what you knew
not, before He taught you its obligations and its proper ways (the particle kāf [of ka-mā, ‘as’] has the same
meaning as mithl [‘like’], while the mā is related to the verbal action, or is relative).
[2:240]
And those of you who die, leaving wives, let them, make testament (wasiyyatan, or wasiyyatun) for their
wives, as an obligation, and give them provision, what they can enjoy of property and clothes, for, until the
completion of, a year (matā‘an ilā l-hawl, ‘provision for a year’, is a circumstantial qualifier), that is, without
expelling them from their habitations; but if they go forth, of their own accord, you would not be at fault,
[you] the guardians of the dead one, regarding what they may do with themselves honourably, in
accordance with the Law, such as adorning themselves or abandoning the mourning, or that you should cut
off their expenditure; God is Mighty, in His Kingdom, Wise, in His actions. The testament mentioned here
was abrogated by the ‘inheritance’ verse [Q. 4:12], and the waiting of one year [without expulsion] was
abrogated by the previous verse four months and ten [Q. 2:234] which was revealed later. In the opinion of
al-Shāfi‘ī, may God have mercy on him, the habitation remains hers.
[2:241]
There shall be provision for divorced women, which they are given, honourably, as is feasible — an
obligation (haqqan, ‘obligation’, is in the accusative because it is governed by an implied verb) on those who
fear God, may He be exalted. He has repeated the phrase in order to include the woman that has been
touched [sexually], since the previous verse addresses a different issue.
[2:242]
So, in the same way that He has explained to you what has been mentioned, God makes clear His signs for
you, so that you might understand, reflect.
[2:243]
Have you not seen (an interrogative to provoke amazement and a longing to hear what will follow), that is,
‘Has your knowledge not attained’, those thousands, four, eight, ten, thirty, forty or seventy thousand, who
went forth from their habitations fearful of death? (hadhara’l-mawt: an object denoting reason). These were
a people from among the Children of Israel who fled their homeland after it was afflicted with plague. God
said to them, ‘Die!’, and they did. Then He gave them life, after eight days or more, as a result of the
supplication of their prophet Ezekiel (Hizqīl), and they lived on for a while with the effects of death still upon
them, such that when they wore garments these turned into shrouds for the deceased; and this
[phenomenon] remained with their descendants. Truly God is bounteous to people, such as when He gave
life back to those just mentioned, but most people, that is, disbelievers, are not thankful. The purpose of
44

mentioning the story of these people is to encourage believers to fight [in the way of God], which is why the
following [statement] is supplemented to it:
[2:244]
So fight in God’s way, in order to elevate His religion, and know that God is Hearing, of your sayings,
Knowing, of your affairs, and He will requite you accordingly.
[2:245]
Who is he that will lend God a loan, by expending his property in the way of God, that is good, by expending
it for the sake of God, Mighty and Majestic, out of pureness of heart, and He will multiply (yudā‘if, also read
yuda‘‘if) it for him manifold?, up to ten or seven hundred times or more, as will be mentioned soon. God
straitens, sustenance for whomever He wills in order to try him, and enlarges, it in abundance for whomever
He wills in order to test him; and to Him you shall be returned, in the Hereafter through the Resurrection,
where He will requite you for your deeds.
[2:246]
Have you not seen, the story and the tale of, the council, an assembly, of the Children of Israel, after, the
death of, Moses, when they said to a prophet of theirs, namely, Samuel, ‘Send, establish, for us a king, to
unite us and to whom we can refer [matters], and we will fight, with him, in God’s way’. He, the prophet,
said, to them: ‘Might it be that (‘asaytum, or ‘asītum) if fighting is prescribed for you, you will not fight? (allā
tuqātilū is the predicate of ‘asā, ‘might it be’; the interrogative is intended to confirm the expectation that
follows [sc. that they will not fight]). They said, ‘Why should we not fight in God’s way, when we have been
expelled from our habitations and our children?’, as a result of these latter being taken captive or killed, that
which they suffered at the hands of Goliath and his men. The meaning is, ‘There is nothing to stop us
fighting, provided the requirement [we demanded] is forthcoming’. God, exalted be He, says, Yet when
fighting was prescribed for them, they turned their backs, from fighting in cowardice, except a few of them,
the ones that crossed the river with Saul (Tālūt), as will be mentioned; and God has knowledge of the
evildoers, and will requite them accordingly. The prophet then asked his Lord to send forth a king, and God
responded by sending forth Saul.
[2:247]
Then their prophet said to them, ‘Verily God has raised up Saul for you as king’ They said, ‘How can he be
king over us when we have better right than he to kingship, since he is not of the tribe of monarchs or that
of prophets; he [Saul] was a tanner or a shepherd; seeing he has not been given amplitude of wealth?’
which he can use to establish a kingdom. He, the prophet, said, to them, ‘God has chosen him over you, for
kingship, and has increased him broadly, amply, in knowledge and body: at that time, he was the most
knowledgeable and the most handsome of all the Children of Israel, and the most perfect of character. God
gives the kingship to whom He will, in the way He does, and there can be no objection; and God is
Embracing, in His bounty, Knowing, of those who deserve it.
[2:248]
And their prophet said to them, after they had demanded a sign of his kingship: ‘The sign of his kingship is
that there will come to you the Ark, a chest containing the images of the prophets, which God sent down to
Adam, and which was handed down to them [sc. the Israelites], until the Amalekites seized it from them in
battle. They used to commence fighting invoking it before their enemy and marching behind it, as well as
experience peacefulness in its presence, as God says: therein is a Spirit of Peace, reassurance for your
hearts, from your Lord, and a remnant of what the folk of Moses and the folk of Aaron left behind, which
were Moses’s pair of sandals and his staff, Aaron’s turban, a measure (qafīz) of the manna that used to
come down on them, and the pieces of the broken tablets, the angels bearing it (tahmiluhu l-malā’ikatu, the
circumstantial qualifier referring to the subject of the verb ya’tiyakum, ‘there will come to’). Surely in that
shall be a sign for you, of his kingship, if you are believers’. The angels bore it between the earth and the
45

sky while they gazed at it, until finally they placed it before Saul. They then acknowledged his kingship and
hastened to enlist in the [holy] struggle, and he chose seventy thousand of their young men.
[2:249]
And when Saul went forth with the hosts, from the Holy House [sc. Jerusalem], the heat was intense and so
they asked him for water; he said, ‘God will try, test, you, in order to distinguish the obedient among you
from the disobedient, with a river, between Jordan and Palestine, whoever drinks of it, of its water, is not of
me, is not of my followers, and whoever tastes it not, he is of me, except for him who scoops up with his
hand’ (ghurfa, or gharfa, ‘a scoop’), satisfying himself therewith and not taking more, he is also of my
followers. But they drank of it, when they reached it and saw that it was abundant, except a few of them,
who restricted themselves to a scoop: it is reported that one scoop was enough for each man and his horse,
and they numbered over three hundred; and when he crossed it, with those who believed, the ones who
confined themselves to the one scoop, they, the ones that drank profusely, said, ‘We have no power today
against Goliath and his troops’, that is, [no power] to fight them, and they were cowardly and did not cross
it. Those who thought, with certainty that, they would meet God, at the Resurrection, and these were the
ones that crossed it, said, ‘How often (kam, ‘how’, functions as a predicate, meaning kathīr, ‘many’) a little
company, group of men, has overcome a numerous one, by God’s leave, by His will; and God is with the
patient’, [providing them] with help and assistance.
[2:250]
So, when they went forth against Goliath and his troops, facing them in military columns, they said, ‘Our
Lord, pour out upon us patience, and make firm our feet, by strengthening our hearts for this struggle, and
grant us victory over the disbelieving folk!’
[2:251]
And they routed, they broke, them, by the leave of God, by His will, and David, who was among the ranks of
Saul’s army, slew Goliath; and God gave him, David, the kingship, over the Children of Israel, and Wisdom,
prophethood after the death of Samuel and Saul, and the combination [of kingship and prophethood] had
never come to anyone before him; and He taught him such as He willed, of the manufacture of mail-coats
and the speech of birds. Had God not repelled people some (ba‘dahum, ‘some’, substitutes for [saying]
ba‘dan min al-nās, ‘some people’) by means of others the earth would have surely been corrupted, with
idolaters defeating and slaying Muslims, and mosques being destroyed; but God is bounteous to all worlds,
by repelling some by means of others.
[2:252]
These, verses, are the verses of God We recite to you, O Muhammad (s), as narration, in truth, and
assuredly you are one of the Messengers [of God], the emphasis is made here with the particle inna [of
innaka, ‘surely you are’], with the remainder of the statement being a rebuttal of the disbelievers’ saying,
‘You are no Messenger’.
[2:253]
Those (tilka is the subject) messengers (al-rusul is either an adjective or the predicate) some We have
preferred above others, by assigning a particular trait to one not found in the other; some there are to
whom God spoke, such as Moses, and some He raised in rank, namely, Muhammad (s), on account of his
call being to all peoples, his being the Seal of the Prophets, on account of the superiority of his community
to all others, the sundry miracles and the many special qualities. And We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear
proofs, and confirmed him, strengthened him, with the Holy Spirit, namely, Gabriel who would accompany
him wherever he went. And had God willed, that all people be guided, those who came after them, after the
messengers, that is, their communities, would not have fought against one another after the clear proofs
had come to them, because of their disagreement and their leading one another astray; but they fell into
variance, as He willed, and some of them believed, and adhered firmly to his faith, and some disbelieved, as
46

the Christians did after Jesus (al-Masīh), and had God willed they would not have fought against one
another (repeated here for emphasis), but God does whatever He desires, giving success to whomever He
will and disappointment to whomever He will.
[2:254]
O you who believe, expend of what We have provided you with, what is due of it as alms, before there
comes a day in which there shall be neither commerce, ransom, nor friendship, that can be of any benefit,
nor intercession, without His permission (a variant reading has all three nouns in nominative inflection
bay‘un, khullatun, shafā‘atun [as opposed to lā bay‘a, lā khullata, lā shafā‘ata]): this is the Day of
Resurrection. And the disbelievers, those that disbelieve in God or in the obligations He has imposed on
them — they are the evildoers, for not respecting God’s command.
[2:255]
God, there is no god, that is, there is none worthy of being worshipped in [all] existence, except Him, the
Living, the Everlasting, the Eternal Sustainer, the One constantly engaged in the management of His
creation. Slumber does not seize Him, neither sleep; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth,
as possessions, creatures and servants; who is there, that is to say, none is there, that shall intercede with
Him save by His leave?, in this for him. He knows what lies before them, that is, creation, and what is after
them, of the affairs of this world and the Hereafter; and they encompass nothing of His knowledge, that is,
they know nothing of what He knows, save such as He wills, to inform of it by way of His messengers. His
throne subsumes the heavens and the earth, it is said that His knowledge encompasses them both; it is also
said that the kursī (‘throne’) itself subsumes them on account of its vastness, as in the hadīth, ‘The seven
heavens compared to the kursī are like seven silver coins lying in a metal shield [of armour]’; the preserving
of them, the heavens and the earth, wearies Him not, does not burden Him; He is the Sublime, above His
creation by virtue of His subjugation [of them], the Tremendous, the Great.
[2:256]
There is no compulsion in, entering into, religion. Rectitude has become clear from error, that is say,
through clear proofs it has become manifest that faith is rectitude and disbelief is error: this was revealed
concerning the Ansār [of Medina] who tried to compel their sons to enter into Islam; so whoever disbelieves
in the false deity, namely, Satan or idols (tāghūt, ‘false deity’, is used in a singular and plural sense), and
believes in God, has laid hold of the most firm handle, the tight knot, unbreaking, that cannot be severed;
God is Hearing, of what is said, Knowing, of what is done.
[2:257]
God is the Protector, helper, of the believers; He brings them forth from the shadows, of unbelief, into the
light, of faith. And the disbelievers — their protectors are false deities, that bring them forth from the light
into the shadows: the repetition of ‘bringing forth from’ here is either to be taken as a reflection of His
[previous] words, “He brings them forth from the shadows”, or as a reference to all those Jews who believed
in the Prophet before he was sent, but then rejected him, those are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein they
shall abide.
[2:258]
Have you not seen him who disputed with Abraham, concerning his Lord, because of the fact, that God had
given him the kingship?, that is, his arrogance towards this very grace of God: this was Nimrod (Nimrūd).
When (idh is a substitution for hājja, ‘disputed’) Abraham, in response to the other’s question, ‘Who is this
Lord of yours to whom you are calling us?’, said: ‘My Lord is He who gives life, and makes to die’, the One
that creates life and death in bodies; he [Nimrod] said, ‘I give life, by sparing, and make to die’, by killing.
He then had two men brought before him, killed one and spared the other. When Abraham realised that this
man was a fool, Abraham, resorting to a more sophisticated argument, said: ‘God brings the sun from the
east; so bring, you, it from the west.’ Then the disbeliever was confused, perplexed and amazed; and God
47

guides not the folk who do evil, disbelieving, to the art of argument.
[2:259]
Or, did you see, such as he, Ezra (‘Uzayr), who (the kāf of ka’lladhī, ‘such as he who’, is extra) passed by a
city, namely, the Holy House [sc. Jerusalem], riding on an ass and carrying with him a basket of figs and a
cup of juice, [a city] that was fallen down, collapsed, upon its turrets, its roof tops: after Nebuchadnezzar
had destroyed it; he said, ‘How (annā means kayfa, ‘how’) shall God give life to this now that it is dead?’,
challenging the power of the exalted One, so God made him die, and remain dead for, a hundred years,
then he raised him up, brought him back to life to show him how this could be done; He, God, said, ‘How
long have you tarried?’, been here?; he said, ‘I have tarried a day, or part of a day’, because he fell asleep
before noon, and was made dead and then brought back to life again at sunset, and thus he thought it was
a day’s sleep; He said, ‘Nay; you have tarried a hundred years. Look at your food, the figs, and drink, the
cup of juice, it has not spoiled, despite the length of time (the final hā’ of yatasannah, ‘to spoil’, is said to
belong to the original root, s-n-h; but it is also said to be silent, in which case the root would be s-n-y; a
variant reading omits the final hā’); and look at your ass, how it is, and he saw that it had died, and all that
remained were its withered white bones. We did this so that you would know and, so that We would make
you a sign, of [the truth of] the Resurrection, for the people. And look at the bones, of the ass, how We
shall set them up, how We shall raise them back to life (nunshiruhā, or nanshiruhā, derived from the two
expressions, nashara and anshara; a variant reading has nunshizuhā, meaning ‘How We shall move it and
make it stand’); and then clothe them with flesh’, and when he looked at it, he saw that [the bones] had
been reconstituted and clothed with flesh, and that the Spirit had been breathed into it, making it bray. So,
when it was made clear to him, as a result of witnessing it, he said, ‘I know (a variant reading for a‘lam, ‘I
know’, has [the imperative] i‘lam, ‘know!’, thus making it a command from God), with the knowledge of
direct vision, that God has power over all things’.
[2:260]
And, mention, when Abraham said, ‘My Lord show me how You give life to the dead,’ He, God, exalted be
He, said, to him, ‘Why, do you not believe?’, in My power to revive; God asks him this even though He
knows of his belief in this [power], as a response to his request, and so that the ones listening will know the
purpose [of the request]; ‘Yes,’, I do believe, he said, ‘but, I ask You, so that my heart may be re-assured’,
[so that it may be] at peace, through direct vision, in addition to that [certainty] which is sought through
logical reasoning. Said He, ‘Take four birds, and twist them to you (sirhunna, or surhunna), turn them
towards you, cut them up and mix together their flesh and feathers, then set a part of them on every hill, in
the land around you, then summon them, to you, and they will come to you in haste. And know that God is
Mighty, that nothing is beyond Him, Wise’, in His actions. Abraham took a peacock, an eagle, a raven and a
cock and did with them as has been mentioned, but kept their heads with him. He called them, and all the
parts began to fly back together, combining until they were whole and returning to their heads.
[2:261]
The likeness, of the quality of the expenditure, of those who expend their wealth in the way of God, that is,
in obedience of Him, is as the likeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundred
grains: likewise what they expend will be multiplied seven hundred times; so God multiplies, even more than
this, for whom He will; God is Embracing, in His bounty, Knowing, those who deserve such multiplications.
[2:262]
Those who expend their wealth in the way of God then do not follow up their expenditure with reminder of
their generosity, of the one on whom they expended, for example, by saying, ‘I was good to him and
restored his affairs’; and injury, to that person, by mentioning this to people whom he would prefer not to
know about it; their wage, the reward for their expenditure, is with their Lord, and no fear shall befall them,
neither shall they grieve, in the Hereafter.
[2:263]
48

Honourable words, kind talk and a generous reply to the beggar, and forgiveness, towards him for his
persistence, are better than a voluntary almsgiving followed by injury, through reproach and deriding him for
his begging; and God is Independent, of the voluntary almsgiving of His servants, Forbearing, in His delaying
the punishment of the reproachful and injurious one.
[2:264]
O you who believe, annul not, the rewards of, your voluntary almsgivings with reproach and injury, as, in
the manner of the annulment of the expenditure of, one who expends of his substance to show off to men
and believes not in God and the Last Day: this is the hypocrite. The likeness of him is as the likeness of a
smooth rock on which is soil, and a torrent, of intense rain, smites it, and leaves it barren, and smooth with
nothing on it. They have no power (lā yaqdirūna is a resumption of the statement about the likeness of the
one that expends for show; the person becomes plural on account of the [potential plural] implication of
alladhī, ‘the one who’) over anything that they have earned, that they did, in other words, they find no
reward for it in the Hereafter, just as one finds nothing of the dust that was on the surface of the smooth
rock, after the rain has washed it away. God guides not the disbelieving folk.
[2:265]
But the likeness, of the expenditure, of those who expend their wealth, seeking God’s good pleasure, and to
confirm themselves, that is, to realise the reward thereof, in contrast to the hypocrites who do not hope for
it, since they do not believe in it, is as the likeness of a garden, an orchard, upon a hill, (read rabwa or
rubwa) a high ground; a torrent smites it and it yields, gives forth, its produce (read ukulahā or uklahā), its
fruits, twofold, twice the fruits of another [garden]; if no torrent smites it, then dew, (tall, a light drizzle)
which falls on it and suffices it on account of its altitude. In other words, it grows and bears fruit, regardless
of how much rain falls; likewise are the expenditures of those mentioned: they will increase with God,
regardless of how much they were; and God sees what you do, and He will requite you for it.
[2:266]
Would any of you wish to have a garden, an orchard, of date-palms and vines, with rivers flowing beneath
it, for him there is in it all manner of fruit, then old age smites him, and makes him too weak to profit from
it, and he has seed, but they are weak, young children who cannot manage it; then a whirlwind (i‘sār are
violent winds) with fire smites it, and it is consumed?, so that he loses what he is most in need of, and now
he and his children have become incapacitated, confused, without any resources. This is a similitude of how
the expenditure of the one expending for show, or the one who reproaches [after having expended],
vanishes and how it is of no avail when he will be most in need of it in the Hereafter (the interrogative [ayawaddu, ‘would any wish’] is intended as a denial). According to Ibn ‘Abbās, this is the person who
performs deeds of obedience, but when Satan comes to him, he begins to work disobedience, until all his
good deeds have been consumed. So, in the way that He has explained what has been mentioned, God
makes clear the signs to you, so that you might reflect, and take heed.
[2:267]
O you who believe, expend of, that is to say, purify, the good things you have earned, of property, and, the
good things, of what We have produced for you from the earth, of grains and fruits, and seek not (lā
tayammamū, means lā taqsudū) the corrupt, the vile, of it, the above-mentioned, for your expending, it as
alms (tunfiqūna, ‘you expend’, is a circumstantial qualifier referring to the person of [the verb] tayammamū,
‘seek’); for you would never take it, the vile part, yourselves, if you were given it as something due to you;
without closing your eyes to it, by being careless and mindless, so how do you expect to give what is due to
God from this?; and know that God is Independent, of your expenditures, Laudable, praised in every
situation.
[2:268]

49

Satan promises you poverty, by making you fear [loss] when you make a voluntary almsgiving, and so you
withhold it, and enjoins you to indecency, niggardliness and the impeding of almsgiving; but God promises
you, in return for your expenditure, His pardon, for your sins, and His bounty, as sustenance from Him; and
God is Embracing, in His bounty, Knowing, the one who expends.
[2:269]
He gives wisdom, that is, the profitable knowledge that leads to [righteous] action, to whomever He will,
and he who is given wisdom, has been given much good, because he will end up in perpetual bliss; yet none
remembers (the tā’ of yadhdhakkar has been assimilated with the dhāl), that is to say, [none] is
admonished, but the people of pith, possessors of intellects.
[2:270]
And whatever expenditure you expend, be it as alms or a voluntary almsgiving, and whatever vow you
make, and fulfil, surely God knows it, and will requite you for it. For the evildoers, who prevent almsgiving
and vows, or expend other than the way they should, in disobedience to God, they have no helpers, to
protect them from His chastisement.
[2:271]
If you proclaim, make manifest, your voluntary almsgivings, that is, your supererogatory deeds, it is a fine
thing, to show them; but if you conceal them, and give them to the poor, that is even better for you, than
making them manifest or giving it to the rich. As regards the obligatory almsgiving, it is better to make it
manifest, so that it serves as an example and so that one is not accused [falsely of not giving]; as regards
giving it to the poor, this is obligatory; and it will absolve you of, some of, your evil deeds (read yukaffir, ‘it
will absolve’, or nukaffir, ‘We will absolve’, either in apocopated form [with no final vowel, yukaffir, nukaffir],
being a supplement to the locus of fa-huwa, ‘that is’, or with nominative inflection [yukaffiru, nukaffiru],
indicating the beginning of a new sentence). God is aware of what you do, knowing its inner and outer
aspects, nothing of it being hidden from Him.
[2:272]
When the Prophet (s) was prohibited from giving voluntary alms to idolaters [as an incentive] for them to
embrace Islam, the following was revealed: You are not responsible for guiding them, that is to say, for
people, that they should embrace Islam, [you are responsible] only for conveying the Message [to them];
but God guides, with His guidance, whomever He will, to embrace Islam. And whatever good, property, you
expend is for yourselves, since the reward is for you; for then you are expending, desiring only God’s Face
(this clause is the predicate, denoting a prohibition), that is to say, His reward and not any other transient
object of this world, and whatever good you expend, its requital, shall be repaid to you in full, and you will
not be wronged, you will not suffer any diminishment of it (both [of the last two] sentences emphasise the
first one).
[2:273]
For the poor (this is the predicate of the missing subject, al-sadaqāt, ‘voluntary almsgiving’), who are
constrained in the way of God, those who have confined themselves [in preparation] for the struggle: this
was revealed concerning the people of Suffa, consisting in some four hundred of the Emigrants (muhājirūn),
set apart [from the other Muslims] for the study of the Qur’ān and to take part in raids; and they are unable
to journey (darban, means safaran) in the land, to engage in commerce and earn their living, since they are
fully engaged in the struggle; the ignorant man supposes them, on account of the way they behave, rich
because of their abstinence, that is, their refraining from asking for things; but you, the one being
addressed, shall know them by their mark, by the signs of their humility and exertion; they do not beg of
men, and make urgent demands, importunately, that is to say, they do not beg in the first place, so there is
no question of persistence. And whatever good you expend, surely God has knowledge of it, and will requite
it accordingly.
50

[2:274]
Those who expend their wealth night and day, secretly and openly, their wage awaits them with their Lord,
and no fear shall befall them, neither shall they grieve.
[2:275]
Those who devour, that is, [those who] seize by way of, usury, which is an excess [levied] in transactions of
money or foodstuffs either on their value or on credit, shall not rise again, from their graves, except, rising,
as one whom Satan has made prostrate, demented, from touch, [through] madness (min al-mass, ‘from
touch’, is semantically connected to yaqūmūna, ‘they rise’); that, which befalls them, is because, of the fact
that, they say, ‘Trade is like usury’, in terms of permissibility: this [statement] is a type of reversed simile
used for intensity [sc. ‘usury is like trade’ is the expected word order]. God responds to them saying that:
God has permitted trade, and forbidden usury. Whoever receives an admonition from his Lord and desists,
from devouring it, he shall have his past gains, those made before the prohibition and which cannot be
reclaimed from him, and his affair, with regard to pardoning him, is committed to God; but whoever reverts,
to devouring it, treating it like trade in terms of lawfulness — those are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding
therein.
[2:276]
God effaces usury, diminishing it and eliminating any blessing in it, but He augments voluntary almsgivings
with interest, increasing them, making them grow and multiplying their reward. God loves not, that is to say,
He will requite, any guilty, profligate devouring it, ingrate, who deems usury licit.
[2:277]
Those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and establish the prayer, and pay the alms — their wage
awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall befall them, neither shall they grieve.
[2:278]
O you who believe, fear God, and give up, abandon, the usury that is outstanding, if you are believers, true
to your faith, since it is expected of the believer that he adhere to God’s command: this was revealed when
some of the Companions, after the prohibition, wanted to reclaim some of the usury from before.
[2:279]
But if you do not, do what you have been commanded, then be warned, have knowledge, of war from God,
and His Messenger, against you: herein is a grave threat for them. When it was revealed, they said, ‘What
power can we have in a war against Him!’ Yet if you repent, and forgo it, you shall have your principal sums,
the original amounts, not being unjust, by charging interest, and no injustice being done to you, by way of
any diminution.
[2:280]
And if any man, in debt, should be in difficulties, then, let him have, respite, a postponement, till things are
easier (read maysara or maysura, meaning ‘a time of ease’); but that you should give (tassaddaqū, where
the second tā’ of the softened form, tatasaddaqū, has been assimilated with the sād), the one in difficulty, a
voluntary almsgiving, by waiving his debt, is better for you, did you but know, [if you know] that it is better
for you, then do it. In a hadīth it is said, ‘Whoever gives respite to one in difficulty, or waives his debt, God
will place him under His shade, on a day when there shall be no shade except God’s’, as reported by Muslim.
[2:281]

51

And fear a day wherein you shall be returned to God, namely, the Day of Resurrection (read the passive
[turja‘ūna] meaning, ‘you shall be returned’, or the active [tarji‘ūna] meaning ‘you shall return’), and every
soul, on that day, shall be paid in full, the requital of, what it has earned, what it has done of good or evil;
and they shall not be wronged, through any loss of a good deed or the incurring of an extra evil deed.
[2:282]
O you who believe, when you contract, when you are dealing with, a debt, such as in prepayment for
(future) delivery of goods or a loan, one upon another for a stated, a known, term, write it down, as
confirmation and security against any dispute; and let a writer write it, the contract of debt, down between
you justly, accurately, not increasing or decreasing the amount or the terms; and let not any writer refuse to
write it down, if he is requested for such a task, as God has taught him (the kāf of ka-mā, ‘as’, is
semantically connected to the verb ya’ba, ‘refuse’), that is, just as He has given him the advantage of
knowing how to write, he should not be niggardly in this respect; so let him write (repeated for emphasis),
and let the debtor dictate, to the one writing the contract, for he is the one being witnessed, and must be
fully aware of his obligations; and let him fear God his Lord, when dictating, and not diminish anything of it,
of the debt due. And if the debtor be a fool, a squanderer, or weak, not up to dictating on account of old
age or immaturity, or unable to dictate himself, on account of being dumb, or not knowing the language and
so forth, then let his guardian, the one in charge of his affairs, be it a parent, an executor, a custodian or an
interpreter, dictate justly. And summon to bear witness, the debt, two witnesses, men, mature Muslim free
men; or if the two, witnesses, be not men, then one man and two women, to bear witness, such witnesses
as you approve of, on account of their piety and probity; the number of women is because of the fact, so
that if one of the two women errs, forgets the testimony, given their lesser astuteness and accuracy; the
other, the one remembering, will remind her (read fa-tudhakkira or fa-tudhkira), the one that has forgotten
— the ‘reminding’ clause is the reason [for the choice of two women], that is to say, so that she may be
reminded if she errs or strays into error, because this [forgetfulness] is the cause of it (a variant reading [for
an, ‘that’] has the conditional in, ‘if’, with [the verb inflected as] tudhakkiru, ‘she will remind’, making it a
new sentence, the response to which [follows]); and let the witnesses not refuse, whenever (the mā of idhā
mā, ‘whenever’, is extra) they are summoned, to bear witness and take responsibility for the testimony; and
be not disdainful, lazy, to write it down, that which you have witnessed in truth (for this frequently
occurred), be it, small or great, a little or much, with its term, that is, the date on which it is due (ilā ajlihi is
a circumstantial qualifier referring to the [pronominal suffix] hā’ of taktubū-hu, ‘you write it down’); that,
writing down, is more equitable, more just, in God’s sight, more upright for testimony, that is to say, [that
is] more helpful in summoning witness, because it contains the reminder; and nearer, closer to attaining
[the desired state] that you will not be in doubt, with regard to the amount and the due dates; unless it be,
[that] there is, trade carried out there and then (tijāratun hādiratun: a variant reading has tijāratan
hādiratan, in which case the nominal sentence is missing its subject, and must be the pronoun for tijāra,
‘trade’, that is, hiya, ‘it [fem. pronoun]’) that you give and take between you, without there being a timeframe, then you will not be at fault if you do not write it, the merchandise itself, down. And take witnesses,
over it, when you are trading with one another, for this is a better means of preventing dispute. The
provisions here are delegated (to the personal choice of the people involved). And let not either writer or
witness, the creditor and the debtor, be pressed, to distorting [the agreement], being prevented from
testimony or dictation; nor should the creditor press them by charging them with what is not suitable for the
testimony or the dictation; and if you do, what is prohibited to you, that is sinfulness, a rebellion against
obedience, and lack of truth, in you. And fear God, in what He commands and prohibits. God teaches you
(wa-yu‘allimukumu Llāhu, is an implied circumstantial qualifier or it denotes the beginning of a new clause),
what is in your best interests, and God knows all things.
[2:283]
And if you are upon a journey, travelling and you contract a debt, and you do not find a writer, then a
pledge (ruhun or rihān, plural of rahn) in hand, as a guarantee for you. The Sunna clarifies the permissibility
of making pledges in towns, where writers may be forthcoming; but the stipulation is made in the event of
travel because in this case it is more important to have a guarantee; God’s reference to it being ‘in hand’
(maqbūda) is a condition for the pledge given to be valid, and to satisfy the pledgee or his representative.
But if one of you, the creditor, trusts another, the debtor, over the debt and does not require a pledge, let
52

him who is trusted, the debtor, deliver his trust, the debt; and let him fear God his Lord, when delivering it.
And do not conceal the testimony, if you are summoned to give it; whoever conceals it, his heart is sinful:
the heart is mentioned because it is the locus of the testimony, and because if it sins, there are other sinful
consequences, and so the person will be punished as though he were a sinner; and God knows what you do,
nothing of which can be hidden from Him.
[2:284]
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Whether you disclose, manifest, what is in your
hearts or hide it, of evil and resolve for it, God shall take you to account for it, informing you of it on the Day
of Resurrection. Then He will forgive whom He will, to forgive, and chastise whom He will, to chastise (both
verbs are apocopated [fa-yaghfir, ‘he will forgive’, wa-yu‘adhdhib, ‘he will chastise’] if taken as the responses
to the conditional, in tubdū, ‘if you proclaim’; but they may also be read with a final nominative inflection
[yaghfiru, yu‘adhdhibu] in which case, it would [constitute a new clause and] follow on from an implicit fahuwa, ‘then He’). And God has power over all things, including reckoning with you and requiting you.
[2:285]
The Messenger, Muhammad (s) believes in, affirms the truth of, what was revealed to him from his Lord,
namely, the Qur’ān, and the believers (wa’l-mu’minūna is a supplement to al-rasūlu, ‘the Messenger’); each
one (the tanwīn of kullun stands in place of the second noun in an annexation [sc. kullu wāhidin]) believes in
God and His angels, and in His Books, all of them and each of them, and His messengers, and they say, ‘we
make no distinction between any of His messengers’, believing in some and disbelieving in others, in the
manner of the Jews and the Christians. And they say, ‘We hear, what we have been enjoined to hear and
accept, and obey; we ask you: Your forgiveness, our Lord; to You is the homecoming’, that is, the return at
the Resurrection. When the previous verse was revealed, the believers complained of evil whisperings and it
grieved them that they should be taken to account according to [the principle expressed in] it, and so the
following was revealed: