[2:253]
Those (tilka is the subject) messengers (al-rusul is either an adjective or the predicate) some We have
preferred above others, by assigning a particular trait to one not found in the other; some there are to
whom God spoke, such as Moses, and some He raised in rank, namely, Muhammad (s), on account of his
call being to all peoples, his being the Seal of the Prophets, on account of the superiority of his community
to all others, the sundry miracles and the many special qualities. And We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear
proofs, and confirmed him, strengthened him, with the Holy Spirit, namely, Gabriel who would accompany
him wherever he went. And had God willed, that all people be guided, those who came after them, after the
messengers, that is, their communities, would not have fought against one another after the clear proofs
had come to them, because of their disagreement and their leading one another astray; but they fell into
variance, as He willed, and some of them believed, and adhered firmly to his faith, and some disbelieved, as
46

the Christians did after Jesus (al-Masīh), and had God willed they would not have fought against one
another (repeated here for emphasis), but God does whatever He desires, giving success to whomever He
will and disappointment to whomever He will.
[2:254]
O you who believe, expend of what We have provided you with, what is due of it as alms, before there
comes a day in which there shall be neither commerce, ransom, nor friendship, that can be of any benefit,
nor intercession, without His permission (a variant reading has all three nouns in nominative inflection
bay‘un, khullatun, shafā‘atun [as opposed to lā bay‘a, lā khullata, lā shafā‘ata]): this is the Day of
Resurrection. And the disbelievers, those that disbelieve in God or in the obligations He has imposed on
them — they are the evildoers, for not respecting God’s command.
[2:255]
God, there is no god, that is, there is none worthy of being worshipped in [all] existence, except Him, the
Living, the Everlasting, the Eternal Sustainer, the One constantly engaged in the management of His
creation. Slumber does not seize Him, neither sleep; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth,
as possessions, creatures and servants; who is there, that is to say, none is there, that shall intercede with
Him save by His leave?, in this for him. He knows what lies before them, that is, creation, and what is after
them, of the affairs of this world and the Hereafter; and they encompass nothing of His knowledge, that is,
they know nothing of what He knows, save such as He wills, to inform of it by way of His messengers. His
throne subsumes the heavens and the earth, it is said that His knowledge encompasses them both; it is also
said that the kursī (‘throne’) itself subsumes them on account of its vastness, as in the hadīth, ‘The seven
heavens compared to the kursī are like seven silver coins lying in a metal shield [of armour]’; the preserving
of them, the heavens and the earth, wearies Him not, does not burden Him; He is the Sublime, above His
creation by virtue of His subjugation [of them], the Tremendous, the Great.
[2:256]
There is no compulsion in, entering into, religion. Rectitude has become clear from error, that is say,
through clear proofs it has become manifest that faith is rectitude and disbelief is error: this was revealed
concerning the Ansār [of Medina] who tried to compel their sons to enter into Islam; so whoever disbelieves
in the false deity, namely, Satan or idols (tāghūt, ‘false deity’, is used in a singular and plural sense), and
believes in God, has laid hold of the most firm handle, the tight knot, unbreaking, that cannot be severed;
God is Hearing, of what is said, Knowing, of what is done.
[2:257]
God is the Protector, helper, of the believers; He brings them forth from the shadows, of unbelief, into the
light, of faith. And the disbelievers — their protectors are false deities, that bring them forth from the light
into the shadows: the repetition of ‘bringing forth from’ here is either to be taken as a reflection of His
[previous] words, “He brings them forth from the shadows”, or as a reference to all those Jews who believed
in the Prophet before he was sent, but then rejected him, those are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein they
shall abide.
[2:258]
Have you not seen him who disputed with Abraham, concerning his Lord, because of the fact, that God had
given him the kingship?, that is, his arrogance towards this very grace of God: this was Nimrod (Nimrūd).
When (idh is a substitution for hājja, ‘disputed’) Abraham, in response to the other’s question, ‘Who is this
Lord of yours to whom you are calling us?’, said: ‘My Lord is He who gives life, and makes to die’, the One
that creates life and death in bodies; he [Nimrod] said, ‘I give life, by sparing, and make to die’, by killing.
He then had two men brought before him, killed one and spared the other. When Abraham realised that this
man was a fool, Abraham, resorting to a more sophisticated argument, said: ‘God brings the sun from the
east; so bring, you, it from the west.’ Then the disbeliever was confused, perplexed and amazed; and God
47

guides not the folk who do evil, disbelieving, to the art of argument.
[2:259]
Or, did you see, such as he, Ezra (‘Uzayr), who (the kāf of ka’lladhī, ‘such as he who’, is extra) passed by a
city, namely, the Holy House [sc. Jerusalem], riding on an ass and carrying with him a basket of figs and a
cup of juice, [a city] that was fallen down, collapsed, upon its turrets, its roof tops: after Nebuchadnezzar
had destroyed it; he said, ‘How (annā means kayfa, ‘how’) shall God give life to this now that it is dead?’,
challenging the power of the exalted One, so God made him die, and remain dead for, a hundred years,
then he raised him up, brought him back to life to show him how this could be done; He, God, said, ‘How
long have you tarried?’, been here?; he said, ‘I have tarried a day, or part of a day’, because he fell asleep
before noon, and was made dead and then brought back to life again at sunset, and thus he thought it was
a day’s sleep; He said, ‘Nay; you have tarried a hundred years. Look at your food, the figs, and drink, the
cup of juice, it has not spoiled, despite the length of time (the final hā’ of yatasannah, ‘to spoil’, is said to
belong to the original root, s-n-h; but it is also said to be silent, in which case the root would be s-n-y; a
variant reading omits the final hā’); and look at your ass, how it is, and he saw that it had died, and all that
remained were its withered white bones. We did this so that you would know and, so that We would make
you a sign, of [the truth of] the Resurrection, for the people. And look at the bones, of the ass, how We
shall set them up, how We shall raise them back to life (nunshiruhā, or nanshiruhā, derived from the two
expressions, nashara and anshara; a variant reading has nunshizuhā, meaning ‘How We shall move it and
make it stand’); and then clothe them with flesh’, and when he looked at it, he saw that [the bones] had
been reconstituted and clothed with flesh, and that the Spirit had been breathed into it, making it bray. So,
when it was made clear to him, as a result of witnessing it, he said, ‘I know (a variant reading for a‘lam, ‘I
know’, has [the imperative] i‘lam, ‘know!’, thus making it a command from God), with the knowledge of
direct vision, that God has power over all things’.
[2:260]
And, mention, when Abraham said, ‘My Lord show me how You give life to the dead,’ He, God, exalted be
He, said, to him, ‘Why, do you not believe?’, in My power to revive; God asks him this even though He
knows of his belief in this [power], as a response to his request, and so that the ones listening will know the
purpose [of the request]; ‘Yes,’, I do believe, he said, ‘but, I ask You, so that my heart may be re-assured’,
[so that it may be] at peace, through direct vision, in addition to that [certainty] which is sought through
logical reasoning. Said He, ‘Take four birds, and twist them to you (sirhunna, or surhunna), turn them
towards you, cut them up and mix together their flesh and feathers, then set a part of them on every hill, in
the land around you, then summon them, to you, and they will come to you in haste. And know that God is
Mighty, that nothing is beyond Him, Wise’, in His actions. Abraham took a peacock, an eagle, a raven and a
cock and did with them as has been mentioned, but kept their heads with him. He called them, and all the
parts began to fly back together, combining until they were whole and returning to their heads.
[2:261]
The likeness, of the quality of the expenditure, of those who expend their wealth in the way of God, that is,
in obedience of Him, is as the likeness of a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundred
grains: likewise what they expend will be multiplied seven hundred times; so God multiplies, even more than
this, for whom He will; God is Embracing, in His bounty, Knowing, those who deserve such multiplications.
[2:262]
Those who expend their wealth in the way of God then do not follow up their expenditure with reminder of
their generosity, of the one on whom they expended, for example, by saying, ‘I was good to him and
restored his affairs’; and injury, to that person, by mentioning this to people whom he would prefer not to
know about it; their wage, the reward for their expenditure, is with their Lord, and no fear shall befall them,
neither shall they grieve, in the Hereafter.
[2:263]
48

Honourable words, kind talk and a generous reply to the beggar, and forgiveness, towards him for his
persistence, are better than a voluntary almsgiving followed by injury, through reproach and deriding him for
his begging; and God is Independent, of the voluntary almsgiving of His servants, Forbearing, in His delaying
the punishment of the reproachful and injurious one.
[2:264]
O you who believe, annul not, the rewards of, your voluntary almsgivings with reproach and injury, as, in
the manner of the annulment of the expenditure of, one who expends of his substance to show off to men
and believes not in God and the Last Day: this is the hypocrite. The likeness of him is as the likeness of a
smooth rock on which is soil, and a torrent, of intense rain, smites it, and leaves it barren, and smooth with
nothing on it. They have no power (lā yaqdirūna is a resumption of the statement about the likeness of the
one that expends for show; the person becomes plural on account of the [potential plural] implication of
alladhī, ‘the one who’) over anything that they have earned, that they did, in other words, they find no
reward for it in the Hereafter, just as one finds nothing of the dust that was on the surface of the smooth
rock, after the rain has washed it away. God guides not the disbelieving folk.
[2:265]
But the likeness, of the expenditure, of those who expend their wealth, seeking God’s good pleasure, and to
confirm themselves, that is, to realise the reward thereof, in contrast to the hypocrites who do not hope for
it, since they do not believe in it, is as the likeness of a garden, an orchard, upon a hill, (read rabwa or
rubwa) a high ground; a torrent smites it and it yields, gives forth, its produce (read ukulahā or uklahā), its
fruits, twofold, twice the fruits of another [garden]; if no torrent smites it, then dew, (tall, a light drizzle)
which falls on it and suffices it on account of its altitude. In other words, it grows and bears fruit, regardless
of how much rain falls; likewise are the expenditures of those mentioned: they will increase with God,
regardless of how much they were; and God sees what you do, and He will requite you for it.
[2:266]
Would any of you wish to have a garden, an orchard, of date-palms and vines, with rivers flowing beneath
it, for him there is in it all manner of fruit, then old age smites him, and makes him too weak to profit from
it, and he has seed, but they are weak, young children who cannot manage it; then a whirlwind (i‘sār are
violent winds) with fire smites it, and it is consumed?, so that he loses what he is most in need of, and now
he and his children have become incapacitated, confused, without any resources. This is a similitude of how
the expenditure of the one expending for show, or the one who reproaches [after having expended],
vanishes and how it is of no avail when he will be most in need of it in the Hereafter (the interrogative [ayawaddu, ‘would any wish’] is intended as a denial). According to Ibn ‘Abbās, this is the person who
performs deeds of obedience, but when Satan comes to him, he begins to work disobedience, until all his
good deeds have been consumed. So, in the way that He has explained what has been mentioned, God
makes clear the signs to you, so that you might reflect, and take heed.
[2:267]
O you who believe, expend of, that is to say, purify, the good things you have earned, of property, and, the
good things, of what We have produced for you from the earth, of grains and fruits, and seek not (lā
tayammamū, means lā taqsudū) the corrupt, the vile, of it, the above-mentioned, for your expending, it as
alms (tunfiqūna, ‘you expend’, is a circumstantial qualifier referring to the person of [the verb] tayammamū,
‘seek’); for you would never take it, the vile part, yourselves, if you were given it as something due to you;
without closing your eyes to it, by being careless and mindless, so how do you expect to give what is due to
God from this?; and know that God is Independent, of your expenditures, Laudable, praised in every
situation.
[2:268]

49

Satan promises you poverty, by making you fear [loss] when you make a voluntary almsgiving, and so you
withhold it, and enjoins you to indecency, niggardliness and the impeding of almsgiving; but God promises
you, in return for your expenditure, His pardon, for your sins, and His bounty, as sustenance from Him; and
God is Embracing, in His bounty, Knowing, the one who expends.
[2:269]
He gives wisdom, that is, the profitable knowledge that leads to [righteous] action, to whomever He will,
and he who is given wisdom, has been given much good, because he will end up in perpetual bliss; yet none
remembers (the tā’ of yadhdhakkar has been assimilated with the dhāl), that is to say, [none] is
admonished, but the people of pith, possessors of intellects.
[2:270]
And whatever expenditure you expend, be it as alms or a voluntary almsgiving, and whatever vow you
make, and fulfil, surely God knows it, and will requite you for it. For the evildoers, who prevent almsgiving
and vows, or expend other than the way they should, in disobedience to God, they have no helpers, to
protect them from His chastisement.
[2:271]
If you proclaim, make manifest, your voluntary almsgivings, that is, your supererogatory deeds, it is a fine
thing, to show them; but if you conceal them, and give them to the poor, that is even better for you, than
making them manifest or giving it to the rich. As regards the obligatory almsgiving, it is better to make it
manifest, so that it serves as an example and so that one is not accused [falsely of not giving]; as regards
giving it to the poor, this is obligatory; and it will absolve you of, some of, your evil deeds (read yukaffir, ‘it
will absolve’, or nukaffir, ‘We will absolve’, either in apocopated form [with no final vowel, yukaffir, nukaffir],
being a supplement to the locus of fa-huwa, ‘that is’, or with nominative inflection [yukaffiru, nukaffiru],
indicating the beginning of a new sentence). God is aware of what you do, knowing its inner and outer
aspects, nothing of it being hidden from Him.
[2:272]
When the Prophet (s) was prohibited from giving voluntary alms to idolaters [as an incentive] for them to
embrace Islam, the following was revealed: You are not responsible for guiding them, that is to say, for
people, that they should embrace Islam, [you are responsible] only for conveying the Message [to them];
but God guides, with His guidance, whomever He will, to embrace Islam. And whatever good, property, you
expend is for yourselves, since the reward is for you; for then you are expending, desiring only God’s Face
(this clause is the predicate, denoting a prohibition), that is to say, His reward and not any other transient
object of this world, and whatever good you expend, its requital, shall be repaid to you in full, and you will
not be wronged, you will not suffer any diminishment of it (both [of the last two] sentences emphasise the
first one).
[2:273]
For the poor (this is the predicate of the missing subject, al-sadaqāt, ‘voluntary almsgiving’), who are
constrained in the way of God, those who have confined themselves [in preparation] for the struggle: this
was revealed concerning the people of Suffa, consisting in some four hundred of the Emigrants (muhājirūn),
set apart [from the other Muslims] for the study of the Qur’ān and to take part in raids; and they are unable
to journey (darban, means safaran) in the land, to engage in commerce and earn their living, since they are
fully engaged in the struggle; the ignorant man supposes them, on account of the way they behave, rich
because of their abstinence, that is, their refraining from asking for things; but you, the one being
addressed, shall know them by their mark, by the signs of their humility and exertion; they do not beg of
men, and make urgent demands, importunately, that is to say, they do not beg in the first place, so there is
no question of persistence. And whatever good you expend, surely God has knowledge of it, and will requite
it accordingly.
50

[2:274]
Those who expend their wealth night and day, secretly and openly, their wage awaits them with their Lord,
and no fear shall befall them, neither shall they grieve.
[2:275]
Those who devour, that is, [those who] seize by way of, usury, which is an excess [levied] in transactions of
money or foodstuffs either on their value or on credit, shall not rise again, from their graves, except, rising,
as one whom Satan has made prostrate, demented, from touch, [through] madness (min al-mass, ‘from
touch’, is semantically connected to yaqūmūna, ‘they rise’); that, which befalls them, is because, of the fact
that, they say, ‘Trade is like usury’, in terms of permissibility: this [statement] is a type of reversed simile
used for intensity [sc. ‘usury is like trade’ is the expected word order]. God responds to them saying that:
God has permitted trade, and forbidden usury. Whoever receives an admonition from his Lord and desists,
from devouring it, he shall have his past gains, those made before the prohibition and which cannot be
reclaimed from him, and his affair, with regard to pardoning him, is committed to God; but whoever reverts,
to devouring it, treating it like trade in terms of lawfulness — those are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding
therein.
[2:276]
God effaces usury, diminishing it and eliminating any blessing in it, but He augments voluntary almsgivings
with interest, increasing them, making them grow and multiplying their reward. God loves not, that is to say,
He will requite, any guilty, profligate devouring it, ingrate, who deems usury licit.
[2:277]
Those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and establish the prayer, and pay the alms — their wage
awaits them with their Lord, and no fear shall befall them, neither shall they grieve.
[2:278]
O you who believe, fear God, and give up, abandon, the usury that is outstanding, if you are believers, true
to your faith, since it is expected of the believer that he adhere to God’s command: this was revealed when
some of the Companions, after the prohibition, wanted to reclaim some of the usury from before.
[2:279]
But if you do not, do what you have been commanded, then be warned, have knowledge, of war from God,
and His Messenger, against you: herein is a grave threat for them. When it was revealed, they said, ‘What
power can we have in a war against Him!’ Yet if you repent, and forgo it, you shall have your principal sums,
the original amounts, not being unjust, by charging interest, and no injustice being done to you, by way of
any diminution.
[2:280]
And if any man, in debt, should be in difficulties, then, let him have, respite, a postponement, till things are
easier (read maysara or maysura, meaning ‘a time of ease’); but that you should give (tassaddaqū, where
the second tā’ of the softened form, tatasaddaqū, has been assimilated with the sād), the one in difficulty, a
voluntary almsgiving, by waiving his debt, is better for you, did you but know, [if you know] that it is better
for you, then do it. In a hadīth it is said, ‘Whoever gives respite to one in difficulty, or waives his debt, God
will place him under His shade, on a day when there shall be no shade except God’s’, as reported by Muslim.
[2:281]

51

And fear a day wherein you shall be returned to God, namely, the Day of Resurrection (read the passive
[turja‘ūna] meaning, ‘you shall be returned’, or the active [tarji‘ūna] meaning ‘you shall return’), and every
soul, on that day, shall be paid in full, the requital of, what it has earned, what it has done of good or evil;
and they shall not be wronged, through any loss of a good deed or the incurring of an extra evil deed.
[2:282]
O you who believe, when you contract, when you are dealing with, a debt, such as in prepayment for
(future) delivery of goods or a loan, one upon another for a stated, a known, term, write it down, as
confirmation and security against any dispute; and let a writer write it, the contract of debt, down between
you justly, accurately, not increasing or decreasing the amount or the terms; and let not any writer refuse to
write it down, if he is requested for such a task, as God has taught him (the kāf of ka-mā, ‘as’, is
semantically connected to the verb ya’ba, ‘refuse’), that is, just as He has given him the advantage of
knowing how to write, he should not be niggardly in this respect; so let him write (repeated for emphasis),
and let the debtor dictate, to the one writing the contract, for he is the one being witnessed, and must be
fully aware of his obligations; and let him fear God his Lord, when dictating, and not diminish anything of it,
of the debt due. And if the debtor be a fool, a squanderer, or weak, not up to dictating on account of old
age or immaturity, or unable to dictate himself, on account of being dumb, or not knowing the language and
so forth, then let his guardian, the one in charge of his affairs, be it a parent, an executor, a custodian or an
interpreter, dictate justly. And summon to bear witness, the debt, two witnesses, men, mature Muslim free
men; or if the two, witnesses, be not men, then one man and two women, to bear witness, such witnesses
as you approve of, on account of their piety and probity; the number of women is because of the fact, so
that if one of the two women errs, forgets the testimony, given their lesser astuteness and accuracy; the
other, the one remembering, will remind her (read fa-tudhakkira or fa-tudhkira), the one that has forgotten
— the ‘reminding’ clause is the reason [for the choice of two women], that is to say, so that she may be
reminded if she errs or strays into error, because this [forgetfulness] is the cause of it (a variant reading [for
an, ‘that’] has the conditional in, ‘if’, with [the verb inflected as] tudhakkiru, ‘she will remind’, making it a
new sentence, the response to which [follows]); and let the witnesses not refuse, whenever (the mā of idhā
mā, ‘whenever’, is extra) they are summoned, to bear witness and take responsibility for the testimony; and
be not disdainful, lazy, to write it down, that which you have witnessed in truth (for this frequently
occurred), be it, small or great, a little or much, with its term, that is, the date on which it is due (ilā ajlihi is
a circumstantial qualifier referring to the [pronominal suffix] hā’ of taktubū-hu, ‘you write it down’); that,
writing down, is more equitable, more just, in God’s sight, more upright for testimony, that is to say, [that
is] more helpful in summoning witness, because it contains the reminder; and nearer, closer to attaining
[the desired state] that you will not be in doubt, with regard to the amount and the due dates; unless it be,
[that] there is, trade carried out there and then (tijāratun hādiratun: a variant reading has tijāratan
hādiratan, in which case the nominal sentence is missing its subject, and must be the pronoun for tijāra,
‘trade’, that is, hiya, ‘it [fem. pronoun]’) that you give and take between you, without there being a timeframe, then you will not be at fault if you do not write it, the merchandise itself, down. And take witnesses,
over it, when you are trading with one another, for this is a better means of preventing dispute. The
provisions here are delegated (to the personal choice of the people involved). And let not either writer or
witness, the creditor and the debtor, be pressed, to distorting [the agreement], being prevented from
testimony or dictation; nor should the creditor press them by charging them with what is not suitable for the
testimony or the dictation; and if you do, what is prohibited to you, that is sinfulness, a rebellion against
obedience, and lack of truth, in you. And fear God, in what He commands and prohibits. God teaches you
(wa-yu‘allimukumu Llāhu, is an implied circumstantial qualifier or it denotes the beginning of a new clause),
what is in your best interests, and God knows all things.
[2:283]
And if you are upon a journey, travelling and you contract a debt, and you do not find a writer, then a
pledge (ruhun or rihān, plural of rahn) in hand, as a guarantee for you. The Sunna clarifies the permissibility
of making pledges in towns, where writers may be forthcoming; but the stipulation is made in the event of
travel because in this case it is more important to have a guarantee; God’s reference to it being ‘in hand’
(maqbūda) is a condition for the pledge given to be valid, and to satisfy the pledgee or his representative.
But if one of you, the creditor, trusts another, the debtor, over the debt and does not require a pledge, let
52

him who is trusted, the debtor, deliver his trust, the debt; and let him fear God his Lord, when delivering it.
And do not conceal the testimony, if you are summoned to give it; whoever conceals it, his heart is sinful:
the heart is mentioned because it is the locus of the testimony, and because if it sins, there are other sinful
consequences, and so the person will be punished as though he were a sinner; and God knows what you do,
nothing of which can be hidden from Him.
[2:284]
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Whether you disclose, manifest, what is in your
hearts or hide it, of evil and resolve for it, God shall take you to account for it, informing you of it on the Day
of Resurrection. Then He will forgive whom He will, to forgive, and chastise whom He will, to chastise (both
verbs are apocopated [fa-yaghfir, ‘he will forgive’, wa-yu‘adhdhib, ‘he will chastise’] if taken as the responses
to the conditional, in tubdū, ‘if you proclaim’; but they may also be read with a final nominative inflection
[yaghfiru, yu‘adhdhibu] in which case, it would [constitute a new clause and] follow on from an implicit fahuwa, ‘then He’). And God has power over all things, including reckoning with you and requiting you.
[2:285]
The Messenger, Muhammad (s) believes in, affirms the truth of, what was revealed to him from his Lord,
namely, the Qur’ān, and the believers (wa’l-mu’minūna is a supplement to al-rasūlu, ‘the Messenger’); each
one (the tanwīn of kullun stands in place of the second noun in an annexation [sc. kullu wāhidin]) believes in
God and His angels, and in His Books, all of them and each of them, and His messengers, and they say, ‘we
make no distinction between any of His messengers’, believing in some and disbelieving in others, in the
manner of the Jews and the Christians. And they say, ‘We hear, what we have been enjoined to hear and
accept, and obey; we ask you: Your forgiveness, our Lord; to You is the homecoming’, that is, the return at
the Resurrection. When the previous verse was revealed, the believers complained of evil whisperings and it
grieved them that they should be taken to account according to [the principle expressed in] it, and so the
following was revealed: